# Phase boundaries in algebraic conformal QFT

# Marcel Bischoff

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at G¨ottingen, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1, D-37077 G¨ottingen, Germany

Current address: Vanderbilt University, Department of Mathematics 1326 Stevenson Center, Nashville, TN 37240, USA marcel.bischoff@vanderbilt.edu

# Yasuyuki Kawahigashi

Department of Mathematical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Komaba, Tokyo 153-8914, Japan;

> Kavli IPMU (WPI), The University of Tokyo 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, 277-8583, Japan yasuyuki@ms.u-tokyo.ac.jp

# Roberto Longo

Dipartimento di Matematica, Universit`a di Roma "Tor Vergata", Via della Ricerca Scientifica, 1, I-00133 Roma, Italy longo@mat.uniroma2.it

# Karl-Henning Rehren

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at G¨ottingen, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1, D-37077 G¨ottingen, Germany rehren@theorie.physik.uni-goettingen.de

Dedicated to Detlev Buchholz on the occasion of his 70th birthday.

#### Abstract

We study the structure of local algebras in relativistic conformal quantum field theory with phase boundaries. Phase boundaries are instances of a more general notion of boundaries that give rise to a variety of algebraic structures. These can be formulated in a common framework originating in Algebraic QFT, with the principle of Einstein Causality playing a prominent role. We classify the phase boundary conditions by the centre of a certain universal construction, which produces a reducible representation in which all possible boundary conditions are realized. For a large class of models, the classification reproduces results obtained in a different approach by Fuchs et al. before.

Supported in part by the ERC Advanced Grant 669240 QUEST "Quantum Algebraic Structures and Models", PRIN-MIUR, GNAMPA-INdAM and Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (RL). Supported by the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research, JSPS (YK). Supported by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)) through the Institutional Strategy of the University of G¨ottingen (MB, KHR). The hospitality and support of the Erwin-Schr¨odinger International Institute for Mathematical Physics, Vienna, is gratefully acknowledged.

# 1 Introduction

Boundaries and defects are ubiquitous phenomena in condensed matter systems and have been extensively studies in the setting of Euclidean quantum field theory. In contrast, boundaries of relativistic quantum systems are less studied, especially the impact of the principle of Causality that must also be valid across the boundary. In view of the close (Osterwalder-Schrader) relation between Euclidean continuum field theory and relativistic quantum field theory, the two issues are expected to be closely connected, but the precise statement is not yet clear.

It is the aim of this work to develop a setup for the description of boundaries of relativistic quantum systems in the kinematically very simple case of two-dimensional conformal quantum field theory. Indeed, the expected relation with the Euclidean setting shows up in the relevant classification results.

To fix the ideas, let us introduce our terminology. A boundary is a timelike plane of codimension 1 in Minkowski spacetime, such as the plane x = 0. In 2D, this is just the time axis. While a given boundary itself necessarily breaks Poincar´e invariance, in a relativistic description it can be moved to any other timelike plane.

"The physics" (i.e, the field content and the algebraic relations) may or may not be the same on both sides of the boundary. The extreme case is a "system in a (one-sided) box" with "no physics" on the other side of the boundary. We shall refer to such a boundary as a "hard boundary". The opposite extreme has "the same physics" on both sides, with some discontinuity of the fields at the boundary. Between these extremes, there are many intermediate possiblities, among them the "phase boundaries" (also called "transmissive" or "transparent" boundaries [\[17\]](#page-43-0)) which share the same stress-energy tensor (and possibly other distinguished chiral fields) on both sides, while the bulk field content may change.

A "boundary condition" is, heuristically, a set of relations between the fields on both sides of the boundary. We shall give a technical definition in Def. [3.2,](#page-12-0) and show in Sect. [5.2](#page-30-0) how it accomplishes this heuristic idea.

The term "defect" is not used uniformly in the literature.

In [\[20,](#page-43-1) [15,](#page-43-2) [18,](#page-43-3) [19\]](#page-43-4), a defect is a transmissive boundary condition between isomorphic or different two-dimensional (Euclidean) CFTs on both sides. In [\[17\]](#page-43-0), a conformal defect is a boundary with energy conservation, including the reflective (hard boundary) and the transmissive (phase boundary) case.

An interesting independent approach to defects and boundaries in the setting of nets of von Neumann algebras recently appeared in [\[1\]](#page-43-5). Here, defects are certain chiral nets of local algebras on S 1 split into two half-circles, that may involve degrees of freedom that are attached to the boundary point, and are not required to be covariant under translations away from the boundary. In fact, there is no covariance assumed at all. For a more detailed comparison with our Def. [3.2,](#page-12-0) see Remark [3.4](#page-12-1) below.

Because (in our setting) the two local theories at a phase boundary share the same stressenergy tensor, they share the same unitary representation of the conformal group on the Hilbert space. So the field operators of the theory on one side of the phase boundary can be translated to the other side by the translation unitaries – where they will in general fail to coincide with the fields of the theory on the other side. It is important to notice that the Hilbert space necessarily supports both sets of fields everywhere in Minkowski spacetime, but on either side of the boundary only one of them represents physical observables. The algebra generated by both sets of fields will in general fail to be local.

The first aim of this paper is to develop the algebraic framework to describe quantum field theories with phase boundaries that are compatible with the Einstein Principle of Causality. We shall address this issue in the case of 2D conformal QFT, where the available mathematical tools are most powerful, and where the most interesting classification results can be established.

The standard way to approach boundary problems is to impose boundary conditions, and study their implications. As it turns out in 2D CFT, one may indeed impose a continuum of boundary conditions on the chiral fields. E.g., energy and / or momentum may be required to be conserved. (A system in an energetically isolated box has a hard boundary where energy is conserved, but momentum is not.)

However, once a choice of the chiral boundary conditions is made, one can no longer freely impose boundary conditions for the non-chiral bulk fields. Instead, these turn out to be "quantized" in a highly nontrivial way which can be traced back to algebraic consistency conditions due to Einstein causality. Notice that this is a feature that would be absent in classical field theory. It is the main purpose of this paper to quantitatively describe the quantization of boundary conditions for phase boundaries. The answer will be given in terms of a generalized Verlinde formula pertaining to the bimodule category of a modular tensor category (Sect. [5.5\)](#page-36-0). The case of hard boundaries has been treated earlier [\[7,](#page-43-6) [32,](#page-44-0) [33\]](#page-44-1).

Our work is strongly influenced by, but at the same time largely complementary to the work by Fuchs, Fr¨ohlich, Kong, Runkel, Schweigert, notably [\[18,](#page-43-3) [19,](#page-43-4) [20,](#page-43-1) [15,](#page-43-2) [16,](#page-43-7) [17,](#page-43-0) [25\]](#page-44-2). The latter line of research is situated in Euclidean quantum field theory, where chiral fields arise as (anti-) holomorphic fields defined on Riemann surfaces. Lacking a "Wick rotation" applicable to QFT with boundaries, it is not a priori clear that the Euclidean and the relativistic approach should give the same classifications. Yet, in both cases, the mathematical analysis is based on the modular tensor category of the chiral algebra. The properties of such categories discovered along the way and giving rise to many highly non-trivial and exciting mathematical structures, are explored, e.g., in [\[16,](#page-43-7) [25,](#page-44-2) [8\]](#page-43-8). They give rise to a "topological quantum field theory" [\[18,](#page-43-3) [19\]](#page-43-4) for partition functions and correlation functions of 2D Euclidean CFT in terms of topological amplitudes assigned to three-dimensional volumes bounded by two Riemann surfaces that carry the CFT degrees of freedom.

The structures discovered in [\[16\]](#page-43-7) in the context of more general ribbon categories, become instrumental for many of our constructions and classifications where the underlying modular C\* tensor category is the DHR category of chiral superselection sectors [\[9,](#page-43-9) [13,](#page-43-10) [24\]](#page-44-3). On the other hand, our approach is complementary, because it focusses on the physical interpretation in terms of local algebras of observables, rather than correlation functions and conformal blocks. We shall explain that Frobenius algebras in the category describe extensions of the local von Neumann algebras of observables, by controlling the algebraic relations that additional fields on an extended Hilbert space must satisfy, consistent with covariance and locality. Operations with Frobenius algebras (braided products and decompositions, the "centre" and the "full centre" [\[16,](#page-43-7) [25\]](#page-44-2)) correspond to surprisingly elementary algebraic operations like quotients of free products, central decompositions and relative commutants of (nets of) local algebras Sect. [4.](#page-13-0)

The common feature is the association of modules and bimodules with boundary conditions. Because the relevant computation of the central projections, that completes the classification of boundary conditions for phase boundaries, is quite hidden in [\[18,](#page-43-3) [19,](#page-43-4) [16,](#page-43-7) [25\]](#page-44-2), we sketch here a new proof of Thm. [5.5](#page-34-0) that benefits from some simplifications occurring in C\* tensor categories, as opposed to the more general situation of tensor categories covered in the cited work.

Namely, in our application to relativistic QFT, the relevant category can be concretely

realized as a subcategory of End0(N) (the finite-index endomorphisms of a type III von Neumann algebra N), and inherits the C\* structure and notion of positivity from the latter. In compliance with earlier work on the classification of subfactors N ⊂ M in terms of Frobenius algebras in End0(N) [\[29\]](#page-44-4), we shall use the term "Q-system" for a Frobenius algebra. In all that follows, the important thing to be kept in mind is the one-to-one correspondence between extensions of a local QFT and Q-systems in its DHR category.

The article is organized as follows. In Sect. [2,](#page-4-0) we present some heuristics in a field theoretic language. In particular, we recall the relativistic version of the critical Ising model. This model involves a pair of fields, called the "order parameter" σ and the "disorder parameter" µ, which each satisfy local commutation relations with itself, but which satisfy certain non-local commutation relations with each other [\[40\]](#page-44-5). They can therefore not arise simultaneously in a QFT that satisfies the Principle of Causality. However, the commutation relations are such that σ(x) commutes with µ(y) if x is in the left spacelike complement of y ("left locality"). This situation is prototypical for a relativistic boundary condition: if σ belongs to the field content to the left of the boundary, and µ to the right, then Causality is satisfied. Since σ and µ are algebraically isomorphic, one has isomorphic field algebras ("the same physics") on both sides of the boundary, but a discontinuity at the boundary.

The bottom-line of these considerations is that one has to study simultaneous extensions of a pair of local quantum field theories. Since every extension of a given field algebra yields a representation of the latter by restriction, the issues of interest are of a representation-theoretic nature. The best framework to address them is therefore Algebraic Quantum Field Theory, which captures the positive-energy representation theory in terms of the DHR category of superselection sectors. This is a braided C\* tensor category which we shall briefly review in Sect. [3.](#page-8-0) At this point, all the powerful categorical machinery becomes available. Ultimately, we will be able to describe the two-dimensional boundary theory in terms of the DHR category of the underlying chiral algebra. We conclude the section with the precise definition of "boundary conditions" in the framework of Algebraic QFT.

In Sect. [4,](#page-13-0) we prepare the ground for the construction and classification of boundary conditions by introducing the basic operations with possibly nonlocal extensions of local quantum field theories: The passage to maximal local intermediate extensions, and the "braided products" of extensions which amounts to the merging of the charged fields of two extensions into a single extension. We present these operations as operations on local nets of von Neumann algebras in the AQFT setting, and relate them to the corresponding operations with Frobenius algebras (Q-systems).

The braided product can be understood as a quotient of a free product of two extensions of the same underlying chiral algebra by the obvious relations due to the identification of the common chiral algebra, and by a single additional relation imposing left or right locality. It therefore necessarily violates "one half" of locality. New local models can be obtained by passing to one of the maximal local intermediate extensions.

In particular, a simple algebraic understanding of the previous "α-induction construction" of [\[38\]](#page-44-6) emerges: Its local algebras are relative commutants of algebras of a nonlocal braided product, associated with wedge regions. This puts the α-induction construction on the same footing with the construction of hard boundary theories in terms of relative commutants [\[32\]](#page-44-0).

In Sect. [5,](#page-29-0) we return to the issue of boundary conditions at phase boundaries. Recall that the bulk algebras on both sides of the boundary are two local extensions of the common chiral subtheory, defined on the same Hilbert space, with the left extension being left-local w.r.t. the right extension. But these are precisely the relations defining the braided product of two local extensions (obtained by the appropriate product of Q-systems) as a quotient of the free product, and there is no need to descend to a maximal local intermediate extension. The main structural result in this section is the observation (Prop. 5.1) that the braided product algebra is a "universal construction", that contains all irreducible boundary conditions.

It turns out that the braided product of two local extensions in general has a centre, and its irreducible representations are in one-to-one correspondence with its minimal central projections (Cor. 5.3). Thus, in order to classify boundary conditions, the task is to identify the minimal central projections in a braided product of commutative Q-systems. In Sect. 5.2, we reformulate this problem in terms of a commutative product on a finite-dimensional intertwiner space.

That this task can be completely accomplished in a special case of prominent interest, is another main result of the present work: in Thm. 5.5, we classify the irreducible boundary conditions in the case when the Q-systems of the two local nets arise by the  $\alpha$ -induction construction from two chiral Q-systems A, B in a modular tensor category. These are the maximal two-dimensional extensions of completely rational chiral quantum field theories. Here is in fact the only point where modularity of the category is required. The finding is that the minimal projections are in one-to-one correspondence with A-B-bimodules between the pair of chiral Q-systems. The central projections implement certain relations between the fields on both sides of the boundary (e.g., they may coincide, flip sign, or stand at certain angles to each other). These are the "quantized boundary conditions" mentioned earlier. The precise values of the angles are given by matrix elements of generalized Verlinde matrices that diagonalize the bimodule fusion rules.

This classification in terms of chiral bimodules was in fact previously discovered in the framework of two-dimensional Euclidean CFT [18, 19, 15, 16, 17, 25]. Our streamlined proof ([3, Thm. 4.44]) takes advantage of the simplifications occurring in C\* tensor categories, by using a positivity argument in the decisive step establishing orthogonality of the projections, cf. the paragraph after Thm. 5.5).

Along the way, we shall completely work out the example of the two-dimensional Ising model (Sect. 4.7, Sect. 5.3, Sect. 5.6), for which the algebraic computations are sufficiently simple to be done explicitly.

# <span id="page-4-0"></span>2 Heuristic considerations

We rephrase in a Lorentzian setting the characterization of [17], which is placed in a Euclidean setting. Spacetime is two-dimensional Minkowski space with coordinates (t, x). Without loss of generality, we place the boundary at x = 0, so the boundary is the time axis in  $\mathbb{M}_2$ .

#### 2.1 Boundary conditions for chiral fields

We denote the subspace x > 0 by  $\mathbb{M}_R$ , and the subspace x < 0 by  $\mathbb{M}_L$ . On both sides of the boundary, we have left- and right-moving chiral fields, for which we reserve the labels + and  $-^1$ .

Let us accordingly denote the chiral components of the stress-energy tensor on either side of the boundary by  $T_+^L(t+x)$ ,  $T_-^L(t-x)$ ,  $T_+^R(t+x)$ ,  $T_-^R(t-x)$  (where the former two are

<span id="page-4-1"></span><sup>&</sup>lt;sup>1</sup>corresponding to holomorphic and anti-holomorphic fields in the Euclidean framework. The renaming of " $M_+$ " in [32] into  $\mathbb{M}_R$  in this paper is made in order to prevent confusion.

defined at x < 0, and the latter two at x > 0). Then the energy conservation at the boundary  $(T_{01}^L(t,0) = T_{01}^R(t,0))$  reads<sup>2</sup>

<span id="page-5-1"></span>
$$T_{+}^{L}(t) + T_{-}^{R}(t) = T_{+}^{R}(t) + T_{-}^{L}(t).$$
 (2.1)

There are several types of solutions to this condition: the **reflective** solution

$$T_{+}^{L}(t) = T_{-}^{L}(t), \qquad T_{+}^{R}(t) = T_{-}^{R}(t),$$

the **transmissive** solution

<span id="page-5-2"></span>
$$T_{+}^{L}(t) = T_{+}^{R}(t), \qquad T_{-}^{L}(t) = T_{-}^{R}(t),$$
 (2.2)

or combinations of both, like

$$T_{+}^{L} = T_{1} + T_{2}, \quad T_{-}^{R} = T_{3} + T_{4}, \qquad T_{+}^{R} = T_{1} + T_{3}, \quad T_{-}^{L} = T_{2} + T_{4},$$

where  $T_k$  are independent chiral stress-energy tensors, and  $T_1$  and  $T_4$  are transmitted while  $T_2$  and  $T_3$  are reflected. There are more solutions which are of neither type, eg, if  $j_1$  and  $j_2$  are two independent chiral currents, then

$$T_{+}^{L} = j_{1}^{2}, \quad T_{-}^{R} = j_{2}^{2}, \qquad T_{+}^{R} = (\cos \alpha j_{1} + \sin \alpha j_{2})^{2}, \quad T_{-}^{L} = (-\sin \alpha j_{1} + \cos \alpha j_{2})^{2}$$

for any angle  $\alpha$  also solve the condition Eq. (2.1). In this case, the boundary effect is a gauge transformation of the O(2)-symmetric doublet  $(j_1, j_2)$ .

Since causality should also hold in the presence of a boundary, one obtains conditions on the local commutativity among the four stress-tensors involved. (The argument is standard, exploiting the fact that a chiral field, say  $\phi_+(u)$ , is localized at any point (t,x) such that t+x=u, with the restriction that, say for  $T_\pm^R$ , x must be positive. Whenever one can find pairs of two such points which are spacelike separated, then the two field operators must commute.) First considering points at equal time in  $\mathbb{M}_R$ , one finds that both  $T_\pm^R$  must be local fields (i.e., commute with themselves except at coinciding points), and that  $T_\pm^R$  must be forward-local w.r.t.  $T_-^R$  (i.e.,  $[T_+^R(u), T_-^R(v)] = 0$  whenever u > v = t - x). Similarly,  $T_\pm^L$  must be local, and  $T_-^L$  must be forward-local w.r.t.  $T_+^L$ . Considering points at equal time on opposite sides of the boundary, one finds that  $T_+^R$  must commute with  $T_-^R$  (that is: at all points, also coinciding ones).

But requiring also Möbius covariance of the chiral fields, forward locality implies backward locality because chiral fields on  $\mathbb{R}$  extend to the compactification  $S^1$ , so the two mutually commuting fields  $T_+^R$ ,  $T_-^L$  must in fact be relatively local w.r.t. to the two mutually commuting fields  $T_+^L$ ,  $T_-^R$  (that is, the commutator is supported at equal points). Thus, all four fields are mutually local w.r.t. each other, and  $T_+^L$  commutes with  $T_-^R$ , and  $T_+^R$  commutes with  $T_-^L$ . These conditions are met in all the examples above.

In the reflective case, it follows that the two sides completely decouple, and the theory may be regarded as a tensor product of two hard boundary theories on either side, living on independent Hilbert spaces.

On the other hand, the transmissive solution Eq. (2.2) may also be characterized by the second condition supplementing Eq. (2.1)

$$T_{+}^{L}(t) - T_{-}^{R}(t) = T_{+}^{R}(t) - T_{-}^{L}(t).$$
(2.3)

<span id="page-5-0"></span><sup>&</sup>lt;sup>2</sup>This condition is called "conformal defect" in [17], whereas the more special case Eq. (2.2) is called "topological". In [15], Eq. (2.2) is referred to as "conformal".

This equation just expresses the conservation of momentum at the boundary. (Clearly, momentum is not conserved at a hard boundary.) While we always want to impose energy conservation by default, momentum conservation is equivalent to the transmissivity condition for the stress-energy tensors. Notice that the commutativity between  $T_+^L$  and  $T_-^R$  then implies that  $T_+^L = T_+^R$  commutes with  $T_-^L = T_-^R$ .

In general, there may be other chiral fields. In fact, every two-dimensional conserved rank-n symmetric traceless tensor current splits into a pair of two chiral fields of scaling dimension n. Thus one can imagine that by imposing or not imposing conservation of the associated charge at the boundary, one obtains a vast multitude of possibilities, among which hard boundaries (reflective for all chiral fields) and phase boundaries (transmissive for all chiral fields) are only extremal cases.

In general, the boundary will be transmissive for a subset of chiral fields if it preserves the corresponding symmetries, so that the two field theories on both sides of the boundary share the transmitted chiral fields.

#### 2.2 Bulk fields

Apart from the transmitted (hence common) chiral fields, the quantum field theories on each side may have more chiral fields that are not transmitted, and each side may have further local fields that are not chiral. Thus both sides are extensions of quantum field theories of the form  $\mathcal{A}_+ \otimes \mathcal{A}_-$ , standing for the algebras of the transmitted left- and right-moving chiral fields on the respective lightrays  $\mathbb{R}$ .

Extensions of local field theories have been studied in the operator-algebraic setting, starting with [9], and further developped for chiral conformal quantum field theories in [31] generalizing and conceptualizing the notion of "conformal embeddings" [39]. The crucial assumption is that the relative commutant of the subtheory in the extension is trivial; this ensures that the subtheory contains the total stress-energy tensor of the full theory, since otherwise the relative commutant is a QFT of its own (the coset theory [21] in the chiral case) which commutes with the given subtheory. This assumption is certainly not true in the case of a hard boundary, where the transmitted part of the stress-energy tensor is zero. On the other hand, if  $\mathcal{A}_+ \otimes \mathcal{A}_-$  is nontrivial, there may exist different extensions with trivial relative commutant which qualify as different "phases" describing the possible local quantum field theories on either side of a transmissive boundary. For this reason, we also refer to transmissive boundaries as **phase boundaries**.

In particular, the theory of local extensions [31] is applicable in the case of phase boundaries, including all energy and momentum conserving boundaries.

The transmitted left- and right-moving chiral fields  $\mathcal{A}_+$  and  $\mathcal{A}_-$  may be specified independently. Most of the literature refers to the case when they are in fact isomorphic. This may be justified by the option to have several boundaries, including hard ones: As we have seen, a hard boundary on one side forces the right-moving and left-moving fields to coincide in the bulk between this boundary and a transmissive boundary on the other side.

Only for special issues: the canonical local extension (Sect. 4.6), the  $\alpha$ -induction construction (Sect. 4.10), and the complete classification of irreducible boundary conditions in terms of bimodules (Sect. 5.4), we shall limit our treatment to the case with isomorphic left- and right-moving chiral fields, i.e., we shall regard the bulk CFT on both sides of the boundary as (different) local extensions of the same chiral subtheory of the form  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$  with a fixed chiral theory  $\mathcal{A}$ . In this case, it is well known that there is always a "canonical" local extension of

 $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$  (Prop. 4.6), while more general extensions can be obtained by the  $\alpha$ -induction construction [38]. In fact, every extension with trivial relative commutant is intermediate between the trivial extension ( $\mathcal{B}_{2D} = \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$ ) and one of the  $\alpha$ -induction extensions [33].

#### <span id="page-7-1"></span>2.3 Left locality

In the presence of a transmissive boundary, denote the observable fields to the left and to the right of the boundary by  $\Psi^L$  and  $\Psi^R$ . Both field algebras contain the common chiral stress-energy tensor  $T_+$ .

Since the stress-energy tensor provides the densitites for the generators of space and time translations, the fields  $\Psi^L$  and  $\Psi^R$ , defined on either side of the boundary, in fact extend to the full Minkowski spacetime by means of translations. However, on the "wrong side", they are not necessarily observables.

The Principle of Causality requires that observables at spacelike separation commute. Hence  $\Psi^L(x)$  must commute with  $\Psi^R(y)$  whenever x is to left of the boundary, y is to the right of the boundary, and  $(x-y)^2 < 0$ . Using translations, the same must be true whenever x is to the spacelike left of y. This motivates the

**Definition 2.1.** A quantum field theory with fields  $\Psi^L$  is called **left-local** w.r.t. a QFT with fields  $\Psi^R$  defined on the same Hilbert space, if

$$[\Psi^L(x), \Psi^R(y)] = 0$$

whenever x is to the spacelike left of y.

Then, the construction of a transmissive boundary between two given quantum field theories amounts to finding a representation of both algebras of fields  $\Psi^L$  and  $\Psi^R$  on the same Hilbert space such that  $\Psi^L$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\Psi^R$ , and both stress-energy tensors are represented by the same operators.

# <span id="page-7-2"></span>2.4 Example 1: The Ising model

The prototype of a phase boundary may occur in the Ising model. We briefly review the basic results for the relativistic Ising model, as studied by [40]. Recall that the local fields of the Ising model are the two chiral components of stress-energy tensor with  $c = \frac{1}{2}$ , a local field  $\varepsilon(t, x)$  with scaling dimensions  $(\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2})$ , and another local field  $\sigma(t, x)$  with scaling dimensions  $(\frac{1}{16}, \frac{1}{16})$ . The theory may be extended by the chiral Fermi fields  $\psi_+(t+x)$  and  $\psi_-(t-x)$  on a larger Hilbert space, such that

$$\varepsilon(t,x) = -i\psi_{+}(t+x)\psi_{-}(t-x). \tag{2.4}$$

(The imaginary factor is necessary to make  $\varepsilon$  hermitean when  $\psi_{\pm}$  are hermitean.) In particular, both  $\psi_{\pm}$  are relatively local w.r.t. to  $\varepsilon$ . In contrast, they are not relatively local w.r.t. to  $\sigma(t, x)$ : one has instead the commutation relations at spacelike distance (displayed at equal times t = 0)

<span id="page-7-0"></span>
$$\sigma(0,x)\psi_{+}(y) = \pm \psi_{+}(y)\sigma(0,x),$$
  

$$\sigma(0,x)\psi_{-}(-y) = \pm \psi_{-}(-y)\sigma(0,x),$$
(2.5)

with the sign given by ± = sign(x− y). (Recall that by our coordinate conventions, ψ±(±y) are both localized at the point (0, y).) One may finally introduce the (short-distance regularized) operator product

<span id="page-8-1"></span>
$$\mu(t,x) = \sqrt{i} : \psi_{+}(t+x)\sigma(t,x) : = \sqrt{-i} : \psi_{-}(t-x)\sigma(t,x) : .$$
 (2.6)

This field is known as the dual field. Indeed, the fields T±, −ε, µ have exactly the same correlation functions as the fields T±, ε, σ. (In the Euclidean version of the Ising model, µ is known as the order parameter, indicating the phase transition at the critical temperature.) Conversely,

<span id="page-8-2"></span>
$$\sigma(t,x) = \sqrt{i} : \psi_{-}(t-x)\mu(t,x) : = \sqrt{-i} : \psi_{+}(t+x)\mu(t,x) : .$$
 (2.7)

Now, a quantum field theory with a phase boundary at x = 0 is given as follows. Its generating local fields on the right halfplane are T±, ε, σ, and its local fields on the left halfplane are T±, ε, µ. By the commutation relations Eq. [\(2.5\)](#page-7-0), the field µ is left-local w.r.t. the field σ. In particular,

<span id="page-8-3"></span>
$$\mu(x)\sigma(y) = \pm \sigma(y)\mu(x) \qquad ((x-y)^2 < 0, x \in \mathbb{M}_L, y \in \mathbb{M}_R). \tag{2.8}$$

Thus, the theory satisfies causality also across the phase boundary.

Because both σ and µ must be represented on the same Hilbert space, the common Hilbert space is the enlarged Hilbert space that accomodates also the chiral Fermi fields. (A detailed analysis of the structure of this Hilbert space has been presented in [\[14\]](#page-43-12). As a representation of the two chiral Virasoro algebras, it has the form

<span id="page-8-4"></span>
$$\mathcal{H} = (\mathcal{H}_0 \oplus \mathcal{H}_{\frac{1}{2}}) \otimes (\mathcal{H}_0 \oplus \mathcal{H}_{\frac{1}{2}}) \oplus 2(\mathcal{H}_{\frac{1}{16}} \otimes \mathcal{H}_{\frac{1}{16}}), \tag{2.9}$$

where the representation <sup>1</sup> 16 ⊗ 1 <sup>16</sup> occurs twice.)

Finally, by the equality of the correlation functions as stated above, the local field algebras on both sides of the boundary are perfectly isomorphic, though different subalgebras of the nonlocal algebra generated by the order and disorder fields Eq. [\(2.6\)](#page-8-1)–Eq. [\(2.7\)](#page-8-2).

# <span id="page-8-0"></span>3 Theory of superselection sectors

The classification of the possible boundary conditions is an issue of representation theory. For this kind of questions, the setting of algebraic quantum field theory is the most appropriate [\[9\]](#page-43-9). Apart from the description of representations in terms of endomorphisms, which allows to exploit the full power of the theory of subfactors, it also has the benefit of sparing the necessity of short-distance regularizations of operator products, and other issues of technical nature.

We shall give a brief review of the underlying DHR theory and the use of Q-systems in order to characterize extensions of a given QFT. A Q-system is essentially the same thing as a Frobenius algebra in a tensor category, with the additional qualification that the tensor category carries a natural C\* structure, inherited from the local von Neumann algebras. This feature simplifies some of the general results about Frobenius algebras. For us, the important point is that a Q-system allows to grasp all algebraic features of an extension (commutation relations, operator product expansion) in terms of finitely many data, as we will explain below.

In the sequel of the paper (Sect. [4\)](#page-13-0), we shall review various operations with Q-systems, known from purely categorical approaches to CFT, and establish their meaning in terms of elementary algebraic operations. It then turns out (Sect. [5\)](#page-29-0) that boundaries are described by braided product Q-systems which precisely ensure one-sided locality.

# 3.1 Algebraic QFT

Algebraic quantum field theory starts from the net of local algebras. This means the assignment  $O \mapsto \mathcal{A}(O)$  where O is a spacetime region, and  $\mathcal{A}(O)$  the algebra of observables localized in O. The net is subject to the Haag-Kastler axioms, which just "transcribe" the Wightman axioms without referring to individual fields as generators of the local algebras. Instead, the latter may be taken as von Neumann algebras (provided the causal complement of O is nontrivial). In the case at hand, we assume two nets of (left- and right-moving) chiral algebras, indexed by the open intervals  $I \subset \mathbb{R}$  of the real line (= future-directed light rays). A two-dimensional quantum field theory is then an extension

$$\mathcal{A}_{+}(I) \otimes \mathcal{A}_{-}(J) \equiv \mathcal{A}_{2D}(O) \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D}(O),$$

where

$$O = I \times J = \{(t, x) : t + x \in I, t - x \in J\}$$

are the double cones in Minkowski spacetime  $\mathbb{M}_2$ . Extensions are assumed to be covariant, relatively local, i.e.,  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}(O_1)$  commutes with  $\mathcal{A}_{2D}(O_2)$  if  $O_1$  and  $O_2$  are spacelike separated, and irreducible, i.e., the relative commutant  $\mathcal{A}_{2D}(O)' \cap \mathcal{B}_{2D}(O)$  is trivial. If  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}$  is itself local, we call it a local extension.

At some point, we shall be forced to admit finite-dimensional relative commutants. This obviously still excludes the trivial possibility of extensions via tensor products with independent theories. In particular, the "coset stress-energy tensor" [21] is trivial, because it is affiliated with the relative commutant, hence  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}$  and  $\mathcal{A}_{2D}$  share the same stress-energy tensor (i.e., a common Virasoro subnet), and the generators of the local diffeomorphisms of  $\mathcal{A}_{2D}$  also generate the local diffeomorphisms of  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}$ .

Every irreducible (positive-energy) representation of  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}$  restricts to a (positive-energy) representation of  $\mathcal{A}_{2D}$ . The latter may be reducible. This explains why extensions are an issue of representation theory.

# 3.2 Review of DHR theory for chiral conformal QFT

By default, we shall assume Haag duality for the chiral observables. This means  $\mathcal{A}(I) = \mathcal{A}(I')'$ , where I' is the complement in  $\mathbb{R}$  (= the union of two halfrays). (On the conformal completion  $S^1$  of  $\mathbb{R}$ , Haag duality is automatic, whereas on  $\mathbb{R}$  it is a stronger property, equivalent to "strong additivity".) This implies [6] that all positive-energy representations are given by "DHR endomorphisms"  $\rho$  of the net [9], namely endomorphisms of  $\mathcal{A}$  such that, up to unitary equivalence

$$\pi \equiv \pi_0 \circ \rho$$
,

where  $\pi_0$  is the vacuum representation. The DHR endomorphisms are localized in some interval I in the sense that  $\rho(a) = a$  for all  $a \in \mathcal{A}(I')$ . The localization interval may be varied arbitrarily, namely for every other interval  $\widehat{I}$ , one can chose unitary "charge transporters" such that  $\widehat{\rho}(\cdot) = \mathrm{Ad}_u \rho(\cdot) = u \rho(\cdot) u^*$  is localized in  $\widehat{I}$ .

Intertwiners between localized endomorphisms  $\rho$ ,  $\sigma$  are operators t satisfying  $t\rho(a) = \sigma(a)t$  for all  $a \in \mathcal{A}$ . We write  $t : \rho \to \sigma$  or  $t \in \text{Hom}(\rho, \sigma)$ . By Haag duality, every intertwiner  $t : \rho \to \sigma$  between two localized endomorphisms is an element of some local algebra, hence  $t_1\rho_1(t_2) = \sigma_1(t_2)t_1$  is an intertwiner  $\rho_1\rho_2 \to \sigma_1\sigma_2$ .

The composition of DHR endomorphisms defines a "fusion" product of representations. The composition of localized endomorphisms is commutative when the localization intervals do not overlap. In general, it is commutative only up to unitary equivalence, implemented by unitary statistics operators ("braiding")

$$\varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma}: \rho\sigma \to \sigma\rho.$$

In chiral theories, the braiding is defined [13] by

$$\varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma} := \sigma(u_{\rho}^*) u_{\sigma}^* u_{\rho} \rho(u_{\sigma}) : \rho\sigma \to \rho\widehat{\sigma} \to \widehat{\rho}\widehat{\sigma} = \widehat{\sigma}\widehat{\rho} \to \sigma\widehat{\rho} \to \sigma\widehat{\rho},$$

where  $u_{\rho}$ ,  $u_{\sigma}$  are unitaries such that the auxiliary DHR endomorphism  $\hat{\rho} = \operatorname{Ad}_{u_{\rho}} \rho$  and  $\hat{\sigma}(\cdot) = \operatorname{Ad}_{u_{\sigma}} \sigma$  are localized in auxiliary intervals  $I_{\rho}$ ,  $I_{\sigma}$  such that  $I_{\sigma} < I_{\rho}$  (" $\sigma$  is localized in the past of  $\rho$ "). The braiding is independent of the auxiliaries with the given specifications. In particular, one has

<span id="page-10-0"></span>
$$\varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma} = 1$$
 whenever  $\sigma$  is localized in the past of  $\rho$  (3.1)

(because one may just take  $u_{\rho} = u_{\sigma} = 1$ ). Actually, Eq. (3.1) may be regarded as an "initial condition" which completely fixes the braiding in the general case. The opposite braiding  $\varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma}^- \equiv \varepsilon_{\sigma,\rho}^*$  would have resulted with the opposite ordering of the auxiliary intervals. We also write  $\varepsilon^+ \equiv \varepsilon$ .

These structures and data turn the DHR representation theory of  $\mathcal{A}$  into a braided C\* tensor category  $\mathcal{C} = \mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A})$ . This category is simple (Hom(id, id) =  $\mathbb{C}$ ), strict (the composition is associative), and direct sums and subobjects corresponding to non-zero projections  $p \in \text{Hom}(\rho, \rho)$  are defined.

We shall throughout assume complete rationality, which implies that  $\mathcal{A}$  possesses only finitely many inequivalent positive-energy representations, and all of them have conjugates and finite statistical dimension [36]. In this case, we call  $\mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A})$  "rational". However, complete rationality of  $\mathcal{A}$  becomes truely essential only for the final classification of the boundary conditions in Thm. 5.5, because it ensures modularity of  $\mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A})$ . Otherwise, one may as well choose  $\mathcal{C}$  to be any rational subcategory of  $\mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A})$ .

# <span id="page-10-1"></span>3.3 Example 2: The Virasoro net with $c = \frac{1}{2}$ (= the "chiral Ising model")

The chiral Ising model (=Vir( $c=\frac{1}{2}$ )) has three sectors:  $\pi_0$  (the vacuum representation),  $\pi_{\tau}$  and  $\pi_{\sigma}$  satisfying the fusion rules  $\tau \times \tau \simeq \operatorname{id}$ ,  $\tau \times \sigma \simeq \sigma \times \tau \simeq \sigma$ ,  $\sigma \times \sigma \simeq \operatorname{id} \oplus \tau$ . These are realized by localized endomorphisms id,  $\tau$ ,  $\sigma$ . By choosing  $\tau$  in its unitary equivalence class such that  $\tau^{\sigma} = \sigma$ , it follows that  $\tau^2 = \operatorname{id}$  and  $\sigma \tau = \operatorname{Ad}_u \sigma$ , where  $u \in \operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma) = \operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma)$  is a unitary with  $u^2 = 1$ . u is not a multiple of 1 because otherwise  $\sigma \tau = \tau$  would imply  $\tau = \operatorname{id}$ . One may choose a pair of intertwiners  $r \in \operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{id}, \sigma^2)$ ,  $t \in \operatorname{Hom}(\tau, \sigma)$  satisfying the Cuntz relations  $\tau^* \tau = 1$ ,  $\tau^* \tau = 1$ ,  $\tau^* \tau = 0$ ,  $\tau^* \tau + t\tau^* \tau = 1$ . Since  $\tau \in \operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma) \subset \operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma)$  which is spanned by  $\tau \tau$  and  $\tau$  it follows that  $\tau = \tau$  it fixing its sign).

Now, the action of  $\tau$  and  $\sigma$  on r and t can be computed as follows.  $\tau(r) \in \operatorname{Hom}(\tau, \tau\sigma^2) = \operatorname{Hom}(\tau, \sigma^2)$  is a multiple of t, hence  $\tau(r) = t$  (fixing a relative complex phase), and  $\tau(t) = r$ . Likewise,  $\sigma(r) \in \operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma^3) = (rr^* + tt^*)\operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma^3) = r \cdot r^*\operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma^3) + t \cdot t^*\operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma^3) = r \cdot \operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \sigma) + t \cdot \operatorname{Hom}(\sigma, \tau\sigma) = r \cdot \mathbb{C} + t \cdot \mathbb{C}$ , and similarly  $\sigma(t) \in \operatorname{Hom}(\sigma\tau, \sigma^3) = ru \cdot \mathbb{C} + tu \cdot \mathbb{C}$ . On the other hand,  $\sigma$  must preserve the Cuntz relations of the isometries, and intertwining relations like  $\sigma^2(r)t = t\tau(r)$  etc. must hold. In other words, the defining relations of a tensor category constitute algebraic relations for the unknown coefficients, that can be solved. (This way of

exhibiting a C\* tensor category is known as the "Cuntz algebra construction" [23, 11].) The same strategy also allows to compute the braiding operators. The result for the Ising model is

$$\tau(r) = t, \quad \tau(t) = r, \quad \tau(u) = -u,$$

$$\sigma(r) = (r+t)/\sqrt{2}, \quad \sigma(t) = (r-t)u/\sqrt{2}, \quad \sigma(u) = rt^* + tr^*,$$

$$\varepsilon_{\tau,\tau} = -1, \quad \varepsilon_{\tau,\sigma} = \varepsilon_{\sigma,\tau} = -iu, \quad \varepsilon_{\sigma,\sigma} = \kappa_{\sigma}^{-1}(rr^* + itt^*) \qquad (\kappa_{\sigma} = e^{2\pi i h_{\sigma}} = e^{2\pi i/16}).$$
(3.2)

There exist in fact eight solutions for a braided tensor category with the given fusion rules, describing the DHR categories of other models whose sectors share the same fusion rules, e.g., the su(2) current algebra at level 2. The correct solution is distinguished by the statistics parameter defined as the complex phase of  $r^*\sigma(\varepsilon_{\sigma,\sigma})r \in \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}$  [13] whose value is known (by the Spin-Statistics theorem [22]) from the scaling dimension of the sector  $\sigma$ .

#### 3.4 Two dimensions

In two dimensions, the analysis is essentially the same, replacing intervals by double cones, and taking O' to be the causal complement in  $\mathbb{M}_2$  (= the union of two wedge regions). The braiding is defined such that

<span id="page-11-0"></span>
$$\varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma} = 1$$
 whenever  $\sigma$  is localized in the spacelike left of  $\rho$ . (3.3)

In particular, the irreducible localized endomorphisms of  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A}_{+} \otimes \mathcal{A}_{-}$  are tensor products  $\rho = \rho^{+} \otimes \rho^{-}$ , and, in view of Eq. (3.1), the convention Eq. (3.3) means that the two-dimensional braiding is

$$\varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma} = \varepsilon_{\rho^+,\sigma^+}^+ \otimes \varepsilon_{\rho^-,\sigma^-}^- \equiv \varepsilon_{\rho^+,\sigma^+} \otimes \varepsilon_{\sigma^-,\rho^-}^*.$$

The DHR category of  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A}_{+} \otimes \mathcal{A}_{-}$  is the completion under direct sums  $\mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A}_{2D}) = \mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A}_{+}) \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A}_{-})^{opp}$  of the tensor product of categories  $\mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A}_{+}) \otimes \mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A}_{-})^{opp}$ . Here, we write  $\mathcal{C}^{opp}$  for the tensor category equipped with the opposite braiding  $\varepsilon^{-}$ .

### 3.5 Extensions

An extension of a local QFT  $\mathcal{A}$  is a quantum field theory  $\mathcal{B}$  together with an embedding  $\iota: \mathcal{A} \to \mathcal{B}$  such that  $\iota(\mathcal{A}(O)) \subset \mathcal{B}(O)$  for every region O, and  $\mathcal{B}$  is relatively local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{A}$  (but not necessarily itself local).

In Sect. 4, we shall describe finite-index extensions in terms of the DHR category  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$  (making essential use of the fact that the vacuum representation of  $\mathcal{B}$  restricts to a DHR representation  $\theta$  of  $\mathcal{A}$ ). Heuristically, the condition of finite index ensures that  $\mathcal{A}$  and  $\mathcal{B}$  share the same stress-energy tensor. If  $\mathcal{A}$  is rational, all irreducible extensions have finite index [31]. Otherwise, the same is true if  $\theta$  belongs to some rational full subcategory of  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$ .

We shall introduce in Sect. 4.4 "charged field operators"  $\Psi_{\rho} \in \mathcal{B}$  that intertwine a DHR representation  $\rho \prec \theta$  of  $\mathcal{A}$  with the vacuum representation, and together with the subalgebra  $\mathcal{A}$  generate  $\mathcal{B}$ . These are the AQFT counterparts of sector-generating primary fields in CFT.

#### <span id="page-11-1"></span>3.6 Phase boundaries

A phase boundary is given by specifying two *local* extensions  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^R$  of a common (completely rational) subnet  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A}_+ \otimes \mathcal{A}_-$  of chiral observables, covariantly represented on the

same Hilbert space, such that

$$\mathcal{B}_{2\mathrm{D}}(O) = \begin{cases} \mathcal{B}_{2\mathrm{D}}^{L}(O) \\ \mathcal{B}_{2\mathrm{D}}^{R}(O) \end{cases} \quad \text{if } O \text{ lies to the } \begin{cases} \text{left} \\ \text{right} \end{cases} \text{ of the boundary.}$$

The choice of  $\mathcal{A}_+$  and  $\mathcal{A}_-$  is part of the specification of the model; as motivated by Eq. (2.2),  $\mathcal{A}_\pm$  are assumed to contain the generators of the local diffeomorphisms, and hence the local algebras of both nets  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^R$  are in fact defined for every region  $O \subset \mathbb{M}_2$ . They just do not qualify as observables on the "wrong" side of the boundary. Causality requires that the algebras  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^L(O_1)$  and  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^R(O_2)$  commute whenever  $O_1 \subset \mathbb{M}^L$  and  $O_2 \subset \mathbb{M}^R$  are spacelike separated. By diffeomorphism covariance, the same must be true whenever  $O_1$  is to the spacelike left of  $O_2$ .

Thus, the actual location of the boundary is perfectly arbitrary, and it may be any timelike curve. This feature is referred to as "topological" in [18, 19].

As in Sect. 2.3, we define "left locality":

**Definition 3.1.** For two nets of local algebras  $\mathcal{B}_i(O)$  defined on the same Hilbert space, we say that  $\mathcal{B}_1$  is **left-local** w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_2$ , if  $\mathcal{B}_1(O_1)$  commutes with  $\mathcal{B}_2(O_2)$  whenever  $O_1$  is in the left causal complement of  $O_2$ .  $\mathcal{B}_1$  is **right-local** w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_2$ , iff  $\mathcal{B}_2$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_1$ . The same definition makes sense for a pair of chiral nets, replacing double cones O by intervals  $I \subset \mathbb{R}$ , except that in this case the terms "backward-local" and "forward-local" may be more appropriate [34].

We shall treat chiral and two-dimensional phase boundaries at an equal footing, and suppress the subscript 2D in the remainder of this section.

Thus, at a phase boundary,  $\mathcal{B}^L$  has to be left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}^R$ . Given a phase boundary, one may consider the local algebras

<span id="page-12-2"></span>
$$\mathcal{D}(O) := \mathcal{B}^L(O) \vee \mathcal{B}^R(O). \tag{3.4}$$

 $\mathcal{D}$  is another extension of  $\mathcal{A}$ , but  $\mathcal{D}$  will in general be nonlocal, because  $\mathcal{B}^L$  may (and will) not be also right-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}^R$ , cf. Example 1, Sect. 2.4. A boundary *condition* then specifies the precise "relative algebraic position" of the local subtheories  $\mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R$  within  $\mathcal{D}$ .

<span id="page-12-0"></span>**Definition 3.2.** A **defect** between nets  $\mathcal{B}^L \supset \mathcal{A}$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R \supset \mathcal{A}$  with respect to  $\mathcal{A}$  is implemented by a relatively local extension  $\mathcal{D} \supset \mathcal{A}$  of finite index, such that  $\mathcal{B}^{L/R}$  are intermediate extensions and  $\mathcal{D}$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}^R$  and right-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}^L$ . In particular,  $\mathcal{B}^L$  is left-local with respect to  $\mathcal{B}^R$ . We call it a **boundary condition** if Eq. (3.4) holds, **simple** or **factorial** if  $\mathcal{D}(O)$  are factors, and **irreducible** if  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}$  is an irreducible extension, i.e.,  $\mathcal{A}(O)' \cap \mathcal{D}(O) = \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}$ .

If  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}$  is a defect between  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^R$ , then the restriction to  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^L \vee \mathcal{B}^R$  is a boundary condition. For the justification of the terminology "simple  $\equiv$  factorial", see Sect. 4.2.

**Remark 3.3.** The above definition applies as well for boundary conditions at one-dimensional phase boundaries in two-dimensional Minkowski spacetime (our actual issue of interest), as for boundary conditions between chiral nets where the boundary is just a point.

<span id="page-12-1"></span>Remark 3.4. As we shall see in Sect. 5.2, the condition Eq. (3.4) ensures that irreducible boundary conditions can be formulated as algebraic relations among the charged fields from  $\mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R$ . Mathematically, this condition might seem unnecessarily restrictive. In [1], the notion of defects between chiral nets is much broader in this respect, admitting degrees of freedom that are not generated by the given local nets. They are defined only at the boundary, and cannot

be transported by conformal transformations generated by the stress-energy tensor contained in the common joint subnet  $\mathcal{A}$ . Actually, in their axiomatization, even trivial nets ( $\mathcal{B}^L = \mathcal{B}^R = \mathbb{C}$ ) admit many nontrivial defects [1, Prop. 1.22]. The notion of "additivity" which is part of the definition of a defect in [1] does not include the condition that the algebra of an interval across the boundary is generated by the algebras of the two subintervals on either side. It has the advantage that it admits a notion of "fusion" under which the additive defects are closed.

It is conjectured in [1, Remark 1.28 in Version 2] that by assigning  $\mathcal{D}(I)$  to an interval across the boundary, and  $\mathcal{B}^L(I)$  resp.  $\mathcal{B}^R(I)$  to intervals away from the boundary, a defect as in Def. 3.2 defines a defect in their sense. We do not see how this very natural conjecture should fail. Conversely, if one adds "covariance under a common positive-energy representation" and "finite index" to the definition [1], one should obtain a defect in the sense of Def. 3.2.

In order to classify boundary conditions between a given pair  $\mathcal{B}^L$ ,  $\mathcal{B}^R$  (rather than just axiomatizing them), we must find all representations on a common Hilbert space with the required properties. In particular, the corresponding nonlocal nets  $\mathcal{D}$  are not known from the outset. In Prop. 5.1 we shall present a "universal construction"  $\mathcal{D}$  implementing a (non-factorial) boundary condition, along with a reducible vacuum representation, in such a way that every irreducible sub-representation of  $\mathcal{D}$  (each containing a unique vacuum vector) implements an irreducible (hence factorial) boundary condition (Lemma 5.2), and every irreducible boundary condition is obtained in this way.

In the case of the two-dimensional Ising model, the local observables  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}$  without a boundary (Sect. 4.7) are given by the chiral observables  $\mathcal{A}_{+} \otimes \mathcal{A}_{-} = \mathrm{Vir}(c = \frac{1}{2}) \otimes \mathrm{Vir}(c = \frac{1}{2})$  and the charged fields  $\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}$  and  $\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$  (corresponding to the primary fields  $\varepsilon$  and  $\sigma$  in Sect. 2.4), intertwining the DHR representations with the vacuum representation as to be described in Sect. 4.4. In the presence of the boundary, the universal algebra  $\mathcal{D}_{2D}$  is generated by two copies  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^{L}$  and  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^{R}$  of  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}$ , sharing the same chiral observables  $\mathcal{A}_{2D}$ . There are three inequivalent subrepresentations (= boundary conditions): the first one is just the theory without a boundary in which the charged fields on either side coalesce. In the second, the charged fields differ by a gauge transformation, namely  $\Psi_s$  (the order parameter  $\sigma$ ) changes sign at the boundary. In the third, we have  $\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^{L} = -\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^{R}$ , whereas  $\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L}$  and  $\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R}$  remain independent fields (the order and the disorder parameter  $\sigma$  and  $\mu$  in Eq. (2.8)) (Sect. 5.3). The product  $\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L} \cdot \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R}$  turns out to split into two new primary fields: a left-moving and a right-moving chiral Fermi field. Of course, the graded-local Fermi fields cannot be constructed out of the local observables on either side (Sect. 5.6).

# <span id="page-13-0"></span>4 Extensions and Q-systems

We review the characterization of extensions of quantum field theories in terms of Q-systems [31], in particular, the construction of the extended local algebras  $\mathcal{B}(O)$  from  $\mathcal{A}(O)$  and the Q-system. We then show that the centre of a Q-system corresponds to a maximal local intermediate extension, which can be obtained in a simple algebraic way.

#### <span id="page-13-1"></span>4.1 Q-systems and subfactors

Let us start with a review of the necessary facts from subfactor theory.

The local algebras in (conformal) quantum field theory are known to be type III factors M (see [4, Sect. V.3] for a review of the type question). This implies that every nonzero projection

 $e \in M$  is equivalent to the identity in the sense that there is an operator  $s \in M$  such that  $ss^* = e$ ,  $s^*s = \mathbf{1}_M$ .

This feature allows the notions of "sub-homomorphisms" and "conjugate homomorphisms". Let N and M by two type III factors, and  $\varphi: N \to M$  a homomorphism. (Homomorphisms are always understood to be unital, i.e.,  $\varphi(\mathbf{1}_N) = \mathbf{1}_M$ .) Let  $e \in \varphi(N)' \cap M$  be a projection in the relative commutant. Let  $e = ss^*$  with an isometry  $s \in M$ . Then  $\varphi_s(\cdot) := s^*\varphi(\cdot)s$  is another homomorphism  $\varphi_s: N \to M$ . We write  $\varphi_s \prec \varphi$ , because if M is represented on a Hilbert space  $\mathcal{H}$  and N is represented on  $\mathcal{H}$  via  $\varphi$ , then s is a unitary operator from  $\mathcal{H}$  carrying the representation  $\varphi_s$  to the subspace  $e\mathcal{H}$  carrying the representation  $\varphi_{le\mathcal{H}}$ .

The operator s satisfies the intertwining relation  $s\varphi_s(n) = \varphi(n)s$ . More generally, we call  $M \ni t : \varphi_1 \to \varphi_2$  an intertwiner between two homomorphisms  $\varphi_i : N \to M$ , if

$$t\varphi_1(n) = \varphi_2(n)t.$$

The set of intertwiners  $t: \varphi_1 \to \varphi_2$  is a linear space called  $\operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1, \varphi_2) \subset M$ . If  $\varphi_1$  is irreducible  $(\operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1, \varphi_1) \equiv \varphi_2(N)' \cap M = \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}_M)$ , then  $t^*t \in \operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1, \varphi_1)$  is a multiple of  $\mathbf{1}_M$ , thus turning  $\operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1, \varphi_2)$  into a Hilbert space (every element is a multiple of an isometry).

The direct sum of two homomorphisms  $\varphi_i: N \to M$  is defined up to unitary equivalence as

$$\varphi(\cdot) := s_1 \varphi_1(\cdot) s_1^* + s_2 \varphi_2(\cdot) s_2^*,$$

with any pair of isometries such that  $s_1s_1^* + s_2s_2^* = \mathbf{1}_M$ . Conversely, the decomposition of  $\mathbf{1}_M$  into minimal projections in  $\varphi(N)' \cap M$  gives rise to a decomposition of  $\varphi$  as a direct sum of irreducibles.

A pair of homomorphisms  $\varphi: N \to M$  and  $\overline{\varphi}: M \to N$  is called conjugate, if  $\mathrm{id}_N \prec \overline{\varphi}\varphi$  and  $\mathrm{id}_M \prec \varphi\overline{\varphi}$ , and if there are intertwiners  $N \ni w: \mathrm{id}_N \to \overline{\varphi}\varphi$ , and  $M \ni v: \mathrm{id}_M \to \varphi\overline{\varphi}$  satisfying the conjugacy relations

$$v^*\varphi(w) = \mathbf{1}_M, \quad w^*\overline{\varphi}(v) = \mathbf{1}_N.$$

One may normalize the pair such that  $w^*w = d \cdot \mathbf{1}_N$  and  $v^*v = d \cdot \mathbf{1}_M$ . Then the infimum of d among all solutions to the normalized conjugacy relations is called the  $dimension \dim(\varphi) = \dim(\overline{\varphi}) \geq 1$ . If a solution of the conjugacy relations exists at all, then there exist solutions taking the infimum value. Such solutions are called  $standard\ pairs$ . (Any two standard solutions differ by a pair of unitaries  $\in \operatorname{Hom}(\varphi, \varphi)$  and  $\in \operatorname{Hom}(\overline{\varphi}, \overline{\varphi})$ .) If an endomorphism does not have a conjugate, one puts  $\dim(\varphi) := \infty$ .

The notion of conjugacy is stable under unitary equivalence. More remarkably [35], the dimension is multiplicative under the composition

$$\dim(\varphi_2 \circ \varphi_1) = \dim(\varphi_2) \cdot \dim(\varphi_1)$$

and additive under direct sums

$$\dim(\varphi_1 \oplus \varphi_2) = \dim(\varphi_1) + \dim(\varphi_2).$$

If  $N \subset M$  is a (type III) subfactor, denote by  $\iota: N \to M$  the embedding homomorphism. Then the square of  $\dim(\iota)$  is equal to the index [M:N] (the type III version [26, 27] of the type II Jones index). Thus, for finite-index subfactors, there exists a conjugate homomorphism  $\overline{\iota}: M \to N$  with standard pair (w, v). It also follows that  $[N:\overline{\iota}(M)]$  has the same index.

Standard pairs give rise to bijective Frobenius maps  $\operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1, \varphi_2\varphi_3) \to \operatorname{Hom}(\overline{\varphi}_2\varphi_1, \varphi_3)$  and  $\operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1, \varphi_2\varphi_3) \to \operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1\overline{\varphi}_3, \varphi_2)$ , as well as to positive maps  $\operatorname{Hom}(\varphi\varphi_1, \varphi\varphi_2) \to \operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1, \varphi_2)$ 

 $\operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1\varphi,\varphi_2\varphi) \to \operatorname{Hom}(\varphi_1,\varphi_2)$  with tracial properties [35, 3], which we shall freely use in the rest of the paper.

These structures turn the homomorphisms between type III factors into a C\* tensor 2-category (with objects the factors, 1-morphisms the homomorphisms, and 2-morphisms the intertwiners). It is again simple and strict, the homomorphisms admit direct sums, and non-zero projections correspond to sub-homomorphisms. The endomorphisms of a given factor N form just a C\* tensor category  $\operatorname{End}(N)$  (with objects the endomorphisms, and morphisms the intertwiners). We denote the full subcategory of endomorphisms of finite dimension as  $\operatorname{End}_0(N)$ .

For many purposes below,

$$\mathcal{C} \subset \operatorname{End}_0(N)$$

will stand for any full subcategory of  $\operatorname{End}_0(N)$  that without loss of generality can be assumed to have direct sums and subobjects. For more specific results,  $\mathcal{C}$  may be assumed to be braided (which is automatically the case for the representation category of local quantum field theory, [9, 13], cf. Sect. 4.3), and even modular (which is automatically the case for completely rational conformal chiral quantum field theory [24]).

Conjugates and the dimension of  $\varphi: N \to M$  can also be defined when the condition that M is a factor, is relaxed and one admits  $M = \bigoplus_i M_i$  to be a finite direct sum of factors. In this case,  $\varphi(n) = \bigoplus_i \varphi_i(n)$ , and  $\overline{\varphi}(\bigoplus_i m_i) = \sum_i s_i \overline{\varphi}_i(m_i) s_i^*$ , where  $s_i \in N$  are a complete system of orthonormal isometries as before. It turns out [3, Sect. 2.3] that the dimension  $\dim(\varphi)$  (defined as an infimum over solutions of the conjugate relations as before) is no longer additive, but

$$\dim(\varphi) = \left(\sum_{i} \dim(\varphi_i)^2\right)^{1/2}.$$

For the embedding homomorphisms  $\iota: N \to M$ , one calls  $\gamma := \iota \circ \overline{\iota} : M \to M$  the canonical endomorphism of M, and  $\theta := \overline{\iota} \circ \iota : N \to N$  the dual canonical endomorphism of N. By definition,  $w \in \operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{id}_N, \theta)$  and  $x := \overline{\iota}(v) \in \operatorname{Hom}(\theta, \theta^2)$ , and these intertwiners satisfy

<span id="page-15-1"></span>
$$w^*x = \theta(w^*)x = \mathbf{1}_N, \quad xx = \theta(x)x, \quad xx^* = \theta(x^*)x, \quad w^*w = x^*x = d \cdot \mathbf{1}_N,$$
 (4.1)

where  $d = \dim(\iota) = \sqrt{\dim(\theta)}$ . The first relation is referred to as **unit property**, the second as **associativity**, the third as **Frobenius property**, and the last as **standardness**.  $\iota$  is irreducible  $(N' \cap M = \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1})$ , iff  $\mathrm{id}_N$  is contained in  $\theta$  with multiplicity 1.

This system of equations only refers to the algebra N and its endomorphism  $\theta$ . The triple

<span id="page-15-0"></span>
$$A = (\theta, w, x)$$
  $(\theta \in \text{End}(N), w : \text{id}_N \to \theta, x : \theta \to \theta^2)$  (4.2)

is called the Q-system associated with the subfactor  $N \subset M$ , and the number  $d = \dim(\iota)$  is called the dimension  $d_A$  of the Q-system.

The basic result for our purposes is that the Q-system, i.e., the triple Eq. (4.2) satisfying Eq. (4.1) with  $d \equiv d_A = \sqrt{\dim(\theta)}$ , allows to reconstruct the subfactor  $N \subset M$  up to isomorphism:

<span id="page-15-2"></span>**Theorem 4.1.** [29] Let N be a type III factor, and  $A = (\theta, w, x)$  a Q-system in  $\operatorname{End}_0(N)$  of dimension  $d_A$ , such that  $\operatorname{id}_N \prec \theta$  with multiplicity 1. Then there is a (unique up to isomorphism) type III factor M and an irreducible embedding  $\iota: N \to M$  such that A is the Q-system associated with this subfactor. The dimension  $\dim(\iota)$  equals the dimension  $d_A$ .

The construction of M from the given data is rather simple. Namely, M is the algebra generated by N (regarded as a subalgebra written as  $\iota(N) \subset M$ ) and a single generator  $v \in M$ , with the defining relations

<span id="page-16-3"></span>
$$v^* = \iota(w^*x^*)v, \qquad vv = \iota(x)v, \qquad \iota(w^*)v = \mathbf{1}_M, \qquad v\iota(n) = \iota(\theta(n))v \quad (n \in N). \tag{4.3}$$

Obviously, every element of M is of the form  $\iota(n)v$  with  $n \in N$ , and  $\iota(n)v = 0$  implies n = 0.

The conjugate homomorphism  $\bar{\iota}: M \to N$  is given by

<span id="page-16-1"></span>
$$\overline{\iota}: \iota(n)v \mapsto \theta(n)x,$$
 (4.4)

and (w, v) is a standard solution of the conjugacy relations. The relative commutant  $\iota(N)' \cap M$  is given by elements of the form  $\iota(q)v$  with  $q \in \operatorname{Hom}(\theta, \operatorname{id}) = \mathbb{C} \cdot w^*$  by assumption, hence  $\iota(N)' \cap M = \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}_M$ . Thus, the inclusion is irreducible, and in particular M is a factor,  $M' \cap M = \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}_M$ . Because M is finitely generated from  $\iota(N)$ , it is closed in the weak topology inherited from N. One can also show the type III property.

Notice that a braiding is not required in this result.

### <span id="page-16-0"></span>4.2 Decompositions of Q-systems

One can easily generalize Thm. 4.1 by relaxing the condition that  $\operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{id}_N, \theta)$  is one-dimensional, see [3, Sect. 2.3]. In this case, the irreducibility  $N' \cap M = \mathbb{C}$  will fail, and M may even fail to be a factor.

<span id="page-16-2"></span>**Theorem 4.2.** Let N be a type III factor, and  $A = (\theta, w, x)$  a Q-system in  $\operatorname{End}_0(N)$  of dimension  $d_A$ . Then there is a (unique up to isomorphism) type III von Neumann algebra M and an embedding  $\iota: N \to M$  with conjugate  $\overline{\iota}: M \to N$  such that A is the Q-system associated with this conjugate pair. The dimension  $\dim(\iota) = \sqrt{\dim(\theta)}$  equals the dimension  $d_A$ .

If dimHom(id<sub>N</sub>,  $\theta$ ) > 1, the inclusion  $\iota(N) \subset M$  reconstructed from the Q-system as before fails to be irreducible, and the von Neumann algebra M may fail to be a factor. Namely  $\iota(N)' \cap M$  is given by elements of the form  $\iota(q)v$  with  $q \in \text{Hom}(\theta, \text{id}_N)$ . These are central in M if in addition  $qx = \theta(q)x$  holds. Correspondingly, we may call a Q-system **factorial** if  $qx = \theta(q)x$  for  $q \in \text{Hom}(\theta, \text{id})$  implies that q is a multiple of  $w^*$ . This is the same as "simple" in the literature on Frobenius algebras, cf. [3, Sect. 3.7].

In [3, Sect. 4], we develop different decompositions of Q-systems pertinent to these cases.

More precisely, certain projections in  $\operatorname{Hom}(\theta,\theta)$  give rise to **reduced Q-systems**. We characterize the precise properties of these projections which correspond (i) to the central decomposition of M when M is not a factor, (ii) to the irreducible decomposition when M is a factor but  $N' \cap M \neq \mathbb{C}$ , and (iii) to intermediate inclusions  $N \subset L \subset M$ .

If we have two subfactors  $\iota_1(N) \subset M_1$  and  $\iota_2(N) \subset M_2$  such that there is an isomorphism  $\alpha: M_2 \to M_1$ , we can consider a new inclusion  $\iota(N) \subset M$  equivalent to each of the inclusions  $\jmath_i(N) \subset M_i$  (i = 1, 2), where  $\jmath_1 \simeq \iota_1 \oplus \alpha \circ \iota_2$  and  $\jmath_2 \simeq \alpha^{-1} \circ \iota_1 \oplus \iota_2$ . Clearly, the Q-systems for  $\jmath_i$  are reducible but factorial. If  $\theta_i = \overline{\iota}_i \iota_i \in \mathcal{C}$ , then the Q-systems for  $\jmath_i$  may not belong to the same sub-category of  $\operatorname{End}(N)$ , unless  $\alpha$  can be chosen such that  $\overline{\iota}_1 \circ \alpha \circ \iota_2 \in \mathcal{C}$ . In this case, we call  $\iota_1$  and  $\iota_2$  Morita equivalent as Q-systems in  $\mathcal{C}$ . It can easily be checked that this is equivalent with the categorical definition of Morita equivalence of Frobenius algebras using bimodules [25]. We conclude:

<span id="page-17-3"></span>**Theorem 4.3.** Morita equivalent factorial Q-systems in C can be added to obtain a factorial Q-system in C, and every factorial Q-system in C is an irreducible decomposition of Morita equivalent Q-systems.

# <span id="page-17-0"></span>4.3 Q-systems in QFT and extensions

We now "transfer" the basic result Thm. 4.1 to quantum field theory [31]. Let  $\mathcal{A}$  be a Haag dual net of local von Neumann algebras  $\mathcal{A}(O)$ , and  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$  the category of its DHR endomorphisms. The net may be two-dimensional or chiral; in the latter case "O" is understood to stand for an interval  $\subset \mathbb{R}$ .

The transfer from subfactor theory to quantum field theory is possible, essentially because if  $\rho$  is a DHR endomorphism localized in O, then  $\rho$  maps  $\mathcal{A}(O)$  into itself, and  $\rho(\mathcal{A}(O)) \subset \mathcal{A}(O)$  is a type III subfactor. Likewise, for an extension  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}$ , every local inclusion  $\mathcal{A}(O) \subset \mathcal{B}(O)$  is a subfactor.

DHR endomorphisms localized in O, when restricted to  $\mathcal{A}(O)$ , are in fact endomorphisms of  $\mathcal{A}(O)$ , and they have the same intertwiners as endomorphisms of the net and as elements of  $\mathrm{End}(\mathcal{A}(O))$  [22]. Therefore, they are the objects of a C\* tensor category  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})|_{O}$ , which is a full subcategory of  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$  and of  $\mathrm{End}(N)$ ,  $N = \mathcal{A}(O)$ .

In other words,  $(\theta, w, x)$  is a Q-system in  $\mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A})|_{O}$  as subcategory of End(N) if and only if  $\theta$  is the restriction of a DHR endomorphism (also denoted by  $\theta$ ) localized in O, and  $w, x \in \mathcal{A}$  satisfy the relations Eq. (4.1). It is therefore safe to drop the distinction altogether.

Since  $\dim(\rho)$  was defined in terms of intertwiners, one may assign the same dimension to  $\rho$  as a DHR endomorphism, and the same properties (additivity and multiplicativity) remain valid. This definition coincides [28] with the "statistical dimension" originally defined in terms of the statistics operators [9, 13].

In Qft models where DHR endomorphisms with infinite dimension occur, we have to restrict ourselves to the full subcategory  $C_0^{\text{DHR}}(A)$  of DHR endomorphisms with finite dimension.

Let now  $A = (\theta, w, x)$  be a Q-system in  $\mathcal{C}_0^{\text{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$ , i.e.,  $\theta$  is a DHR endomorphism of  $\mathcal{A}$ , and the intertwiners w and x are elements of  $\mathcal{A}(O)$  if  $\theta$  is localized in  $\mathcal{A}(O)$ .

Define an algebra  $\mathcal{B}$  by adding one generator v with the relations

<span id="page-17-2"></span>
$$v^* = \iota(w^*x^*)v, \qquad vv = \iota(x)v, \qquad \iota(w^*)v = \mathbf{1}_{\mathcal{B}}, \qquad v\iota(a) = \iota(\theta(a))v \quad (a \in \mathcal{A}). \tag{4.5}$$

Again, every element is of the form  $\iota(a)v$  with  $a \in \mathcal{A}$ , and  $\iota(a)v = 0$  implies a = 0.

The local subalgebras of  $\mathcal{B}$  are defined as

<span id="page-17-1"></span>
$$\mathcal{B}(O) := \iota(\mathcal{A}(O)) \cdot \widehat{v} \tag{4.6}$$

where  $\widehat{v} = \iota(u)v$  with  $u \in \mathcal{A}$  unitary such that  $\widehat{\theta} = \operatorname{Ad}_u\theta$  is localized in O. Because  $\widehat{w} = uw \in \operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{id},\widehat{\theta})$  is in  $\mathcal{A}(O)$  and  $\iota(\widehat{w}^*)\widehat{v} = \iota(w^*)v = 1$ , it follows that  $\mathcal{A}(O) \subset \mathcal{B}(O)$ .  $\mathcal{B}(O)$  are \*-algebras because  $(\widehat{v})^2 = \iota(u\theta(u)xu^*)\widehat{v}$ , where  $u\theta(u)xu^* \in \operatorname{Hom}(\widehat{\theta},\widehat{\theta}^2) \subset \mathcal{A}(O)$ , and  $\widehat{v}^* = \iota(w^*x^*\theta(u^*)u^*)\widehat{v}$ , where  $u\theta(u)xw \in \operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{id},\widehat{\theta}^2) \subset \mathcal{A}(O)$ .

One has

$$\iota(u)v\iota(a) = \iota(u\theta(a))v = \iota(\widehat{\theta}(a))\widehat{v} = \iota(a)\widehat{v}$$

whenever  $a \in \mathcal{A}(O')$ , hence the extended net  $\mathcal{B}$  is relatively local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{A}$ . Moreover,  $\mathcal{B}$  is itself local if  $\iota(u_i)v$  localized in spacelike separated  $O_i$  commute, which turns out to be equivalent to the condition

The conjugate homomorphism  $\bar{\iota}$  is again defined by Eq. (4.4). There is a conditional expectation  $\mu: \mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{A}$  (i.e., a faithful positive unit-preserving linear map satisfying  $\mu(\iota(a_1) \cdot b \cdot \iota(a_2)) = a_1 \cdot \mu(b) \cdot a_2$ , generalizing the properties of an average over an automorphic group action), defined by

<span id="page-18-0"></span>
$$\mu(b) = d_A^{-1} \cdot w^* \overline{\iota}(b) w. \tag{4.7}$$

The conditional expectation respects the local structure, namely  $\mu(\mathcal{B}(O)) = \mathcal{A}(O)$ .

With the help of the conditional expectation Eq. (4.7), the vacuum state  $\omega_0$  of  $\mathcal{A}$  extends to a vacuum state  $\omega^0 := \omega_0 \circ \mu$  of  $\mathcal{B}$ . The GNS representation of the restriction  $\omega^0|_{\mathcal{A}}$  as a state on  $\mathcal{A}$  is unitarily equivalent to the representation  $\pi_{\theta} = \pi_0 \circ \theta$  given by the DHR endomorphism  $\theta$ .

The upshot of this discussion is

<span id="page-18-1"></span>**Theorem 4.4.** [31] Let  $\mathcal{A}$  be a (conformal) QFT, and  $A = (\theta, w, x)$  a Q-system in  $\mathcal{C}_0^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$  of dimension  $d_A$ . Then there is a (unique up to isomorphism) QFT  $\mathcal{B}$  with local algebras Eq. (4.6) and an irreducible embedding  $\iota: \mathcal{A} \to \mathcal{B}$  such that A is the Q-system associated with this extension. The dimension  $\dim(\iota)$  equals the dimension  $d_A$ .  $\mathcal{B}$  is relatively local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{A}$ , and  $\mathcal{B}$  is local iff

<span id="page-18-4"></span>
$$\varepsilon_{\theta,\theta} x = x$$
 (4.8)

holds. The conditional expectation  $\mu: \mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{A}$  extends the vacuum state on  $\mathcal{A}$  to a vacuum state on  $\mathcal{B}$ , such that the GNS representation of its restriction to  $\mathcal{A}$  is equivalent to  $\theta$ .

Here,  $C_0^{\rm DHR}(\mathcal{A})$  is the full braided subcategory of DHR endomorphisms of finite dimension. Notice that the objects of  $C_0^{\rm DHR}(\mathcal{A})$  are just the finitely reducible objects of  $C_0^{\rm DHR}(\mathcal{A})$  if  $\mathcal{A}$  is completely rational. For a more "physical" interpretation of the extension, see the Sect. 4.4 below.

Thm. 4.4 was proven in [31] under the additional assumption that  $\dim \operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{id}_{\mathcal{A}}, \theta) = 1$ , in which case the extension is irreducible, and the local algebras are factors. As in Thm. 4.2, this condition can be relaxed without difficulty, thus admitting also reducible extensions and extensions whose local algebras are not factors. This generalization is necessary because in the analysis of boundary conditions, it will turn out that one has to consider Q-systems that give rise to extensions with a nontrivial centre,  $\mathcal{B}' \cap \mathcal{B} \neq \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}_{\mathcal{B}}$ .

The central decomposition of  $\mathcal{B}$  will give rise to inequivalent representations (and inequivalent boundary conditions). It is therefore necessary to characterize the centre of the extension, and its central projections.

<span id="page-18-3"></span>**Lemma 4.5.** (i) (With assumptions as in Thm. 4.2, admitting id  $\prec \theta$  with multiplicity > 1) The relative commutant is given by  $\iota(N)' \cap M = \iota(\operatorname{Hom}(\theta, \operatorname{id}_N))v$ . The centre of M is given by  $\iota(q)v$ ,  $q \in \operatorname{Hom}(\theta, \operatorname{id}_N)$  satisfying

<span id="page-18-2"></span>
$$qx = \theta(q)x. \tag{4.9}$$

 $\iota(q)v$  is selfadjoint iff  $q^* = \theta(q)xw$ , and idempotent iff  $q\theta(q)x \equiv qqx = q$ .

(ii) (With assumptions as in Thm. 4.4, admitting id  $\prec \theta$  with multiplicity > 1) The relative commutant is given by  $\iota(\mathcal{A})' \cap \mathcal{B} = \iota(\operatorname{Hom}(\theta, \operatorname{id}_{\mathcal{B}}))v$ . The centre of  $\mathcal{B}$  is given by  $\iota(q)v$ ,  $q \in \operatorname{Hom}(\theta, \operatorname{id}_{\mathcal{B}})$  satisfying Eq. (4.9).  $\iota(q)v$  is selfadjoint iff  $q^* = \theta(q)xw$ , and idempotent iff  $q\theta(q)x \equiv qqx = q$ .

The proof proceeds by direct computation, using the relations Eq. (4.3), Eq. (4.5).

# <span id="page-19-0"></span>4.4 Charged fields

The reconstruction presented above by adjoining an element v to the algebra  $\mathcal{A}$  of local observables and imposing its relations, can be given a physical interpretation. Namely, the DHR endomorphism  $\theta$  gives the restriction of the vacuum representation of the larger net  $\mathcal{B}$  as a representation of the original net  $\mathcal{A}$ . If  $\rho \prec \theta$  is an irreducible subrepresentation localized in O, then  $H_{\rho} := \iota(\operatorname{Hom}(\rho, \theta))^*v$  is a Hilbert space of isometries in  $\mathcal{B}(O)$ , and its elements  $\psi_{\rho} = \iota(w_{\rho})^*v \in \mathcal{B}(O)$  with  $w_{\rho} \in \operatorname{Hom}(\rho, \theta)$  satisfy the commutation relation

<span id="page-19-1"></span>
$$\psi_{\rho}a = \rho(a)\psi_{\rho} \tag{4.10}$$

with the observables in  $\mathcal{A}$ , intertwining the vacuum representation with the representation  $\rho$ . Because  $\rho$  is localized in O, it follows that  $\psi_{\rho}$  commutes with  $\mathcal{A}(O')$ , i.e., the extension is relatively local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{A}$ .

Because  $\mu(\psi_{\rho}\psi_{\rho}^*) \in \text{Hom}(\rho, \rho) = \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}$ , one may normalize  $\psi_{\rho}$  such that  $\mu(\psi_{\rho}\psi_{\rho}^*) = \mathbf{1}$ . Then  $\omega_{\rho}(a) = \omega^{0}(\psi_{\rho}a\psi_{\rho}^{*}) \equiv \omega_{0} \circ \mu(\psi_{\rho}a\psi_{\rho}^{*})$  is a state on  $\mathcal{A}$ . Its GNS representation is equivalent to the representation  $\pi_{\rho} = \pi_{0} \circ \rho$ , justifying the interpretation of  $\psi_{\rho}$  as "charged field operators".

By choosing a complete irreducible decomposition of  $\theta$  by isometries  $w_{\rho}$  (possibly with multiplicities) such that  $\sum_{\rho} w_{\rho} w_{\rho}^* = \mathbf{1}$ , every element of  $\mathcal{B}$  has a unique representation

$$b = \iota(a)v = \sum_{\rho} \iota(a_{\rho}) \cdot \psi_{\rho}$$

with  $a = d_A \cdot \mu(bv^*) = w^*\bar{\iota}(b)$  and  $a_\rho = aw_\rho \in \mathcal{A}$ , so that the operators  $\psi_\rho$  form a basis of  $\mathcal{B}$  as an  $\mathcal{A}$ -module. Likewise, if  $\psi_\rho \in \mathcal{B}(O)$ , they form a basis of  $\mathcal{B}(O)$  as an  $\mathcal{A}(O)$ -module. These bounded operators may therefore be regarded as the analogue of the primary fields in AQFT, such that a general ("descendant") field is obtained by left multiplication ("OPE") of  $\psi_\rho$  with some element of  $\mathcal{A}$ .

The formulae given for the product  $v^2$  and the adjoint  $v^*$  determine the multiplication and adjoint of the charged field operators  $\psi_{\rho}$ . In other words, the Q-system is a generating functional for the coefficients of the operator product expansion of the charged field operators.

In four dimensions, the Doplicher-Roberts reconstruction [10] theorem states (among other things) that for every DHR endomorphism  $\rho$  there is an orthonormal basis of charged field operators satisfying the Cuntz relation  $\sum_i \psi_{\rho,i} \psi_{\rho,i}^* = \mathbf{1}$ , which implement  $\rho$  by the formula  $\rho(a) = \sum_i \psi_{\rho,i} a \psi_{\rho,i}^*$ .

In low dimensions, the non-triviality of the braiding poses an obstruction, so that the range projections of  $H_{\rho}$  in general do not exhaust the unit operator; but one has still the implementation via the conditional expectation:  $\rho(a) = \mu(\psi_{\rho}a\psi_{\rho}^*)$ , assuming that  $\mu(\psi_{\rho}\psi_{\rho}^*) \in \text{Hom}(\rho, \rho) = \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}$  is normalized to 1. More details can be found, e.g., in [32].

Let us for later use compute the proper normalization of the charged fields. We have

$$\mu(\psi_{\rho}\psi_{\rho}^{*}) = d_{A}^{-1} \cdot w^{*}\overline{\iota}(\psi_{\rho}\psi_{\rho}^{*})w = d_{A}^{-1} \cdot w^{*}\theta(w_{\rho}^{*})xx^{*}\theta(w_{\rho})w = d_{A}^{-1} \cdot w_{\rho}^{*}w^{*}xx^{*}ww_{\rho} = d_{A}^{-1} \cdot w_{\rho}^{*}w_{\rho}.$$

Thus,  $\mu(\psi_{\rho}\psi_{\rho}^{*}) = \mathbf{1}$  if  $w_{\rho}^{*}w_{\rho} = d_{A}$ . Later, we shall prefer a normalization such that  $\psi_{\rho}$  are isometries. This is a reasonable option if  $\iota$  is irreducible because  $\psi_{\rho}^{*}\psi_{\rho} \in \mathcal{A}(O)' \cap \mathcal{B}(O)$  by Eq. (4.10), hence is automatically a multiple of  $\mathbf{1}$ .

In this case,  $\psi_{\rho}^* \psi_{\rho}$  equals its image under  $\mu$ . We compute  $\mu(\psi_{\rho}^* \psi_{\rho}) = d_A^{-1} \cdot w^* x^* \theta(w_{\rho} w_{\rho}^*) x w = d_A^{-1} \cdot \overline{w}_{\rho}^* w_{\rho}^* w_{\rho} \overline{w}_{\rho}$  by the properties of standard pairs [35]. Because  $\overline{w}_{\rho}^* \overline{w}_{\rho} = \dim(\rho)$ , we conclude

that, in the irreducible case,  $\psi_{\rho} = \iota(w_{\rho})^* v$  are isometries iff

<span id="page-20-1"></span>
$$w_{\rho}^* w_{\rho} = \frac{d_A}{\dim(\rho)}.\tag{4.11}$$

Similarly, if  $\dim \operatorname{Hom}(\rho,\theta) > 1$ , then  $\psi_{\rho}^{n} := \iota(w_{\rho}^{n})^{*}v$ ,  $n = 1, \ldots \dim \operatorname{Hom}(\rho,\theta)$ , are mutually orthonormal isometries iff  $w_{\rho}^{n} \in \operatorname{Hom}(\rho,\theta)$  are normalized as  $w_{\rho}^{n*}w_{\rho}^{m} = \delta_{nm} \cdot d_{A}/\dim(\rho)$ .

Charged fields  $\psi_{\rho}$  are localized in  $\mathcal{B}(O)$  if  $\rho$  is localized in O. They can be transported to any other region  $O_1$  with the help of unitary intertwiners  $u \in \text{Hom}(\rho, \rho_1)$  where  $\rho_1$  is localized in  $O_1$ , hence  $w_{\rho_1} = w_{\rho}u^* \in \text{Hom}(\rho_1, \theta)$ :

<span id="page-20-3"></span>
$$\psi_{\rho_1} = \iota(w_{\rho_1})^* v = \iota(u)\psi_{\rho}. \tag{4.12}$$

#### <span id="page-20-2"></span>4.5 Example 3: The fermionic extension of the chiral Ising model

The irreducible Q-systems in a given tensor category can be computed by making an ansatz for  $\theta$  as a sector (exploiting the upper bound for the multiplicities  $\dim \operatorname{Hom}(\rho, \theta) \leq \dim(\rho)$ ) [31]), and solving the defining relations for  $w \in \operatorname{Hom}(\operatorname{id}, \theta)$  and  $x \in \operatorname{Hom}(\theta, \theta^2)$  in finite-dimensional intertwiner spaces. For the chiral Ising model (=  $\operatorname{Vir}(c = \frac{1}{2})$ ), we use the formulae from Example 2, Sect. 3.3, and just present the results.

Apart from the trivial Q-system (id, 1, 1) with  $\mathcal{B} = \mathcal{A}$ , there is one other irreducible Q-system with  $\theta \sim \mathrm{id} \oplus \tau$  of dimension  $d_A = \sqrt{2}$ . Up to unitary equivalence, we may choose  $\theta = \sigma^2$  and get  $w = 2^{1/4} \cdot r$ ,  $x = 2^{1/4} \cdot \sigma(r) = 2^{-1/4} \cdot (r+t)$ . The nontrivial charged field is  $\psi = 2^{1/4} \cdot \iota(t^*)v$ . By Eq. (4.3), it satisfies  $\psi\iota(a) := \iota(\tau(a))\psi$ ,  $\psi^* = \psi$ ,  $\psi^2 = \mathbf{1}$ .

If  $\tau$  is localized in I,  $\psi \in \mathcal{B}(I)$ . With  $\alpha_x$  the translation automorphism,  $\tau_x = \alpha_x \tau \alpha_{-x}$  is localized in I + x. With a unitary charge transporter  $u_x \in \text{Hom}(\tau, \tau_x)$ , one can shift the localization of  $\psi$ , putting  $\psi_x := u_x \psi \in \mathcal{B}(I + x)$ . Then  $\psi_x \psi_y = u_x \tau(u_y)$ , and in particular, the local anti-commutativity  $\psi_x \psi_y = -\psi_y \psi_x$  follows whenever the localization regions I + x and I + y are disjoint, because  $\tau(u_x)^* u_y^* u_x \tau(u_y)$  equals the statistics operator  $\varepsilon_{\tau,\tau}^{\pm} = -1$ . Indeed, the unitary operator  $\psi$  is the real chiral Fermi field smeared with a test function supported in I.

The extension  $\mathcal{B}$  is graded local, with grading automorphism  $\alpha: \psi \mapsto -\psi$ , such that  $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{B}^{\alpha}$ , i.e.,  $\alpha$  is the global gauge transformation with fixed points  $\mathcal{A}$ .

#### <span id="page-20-0"></span>4.6 The canonical extension

In two dimensions, the same results can be applied to  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A}_{+} \otimes \mathcal{A}_{-}$  with  $\mathcal{C}_{0}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A}_{+} \otimes \mathcal{A}_{-}) = \mathcal{C}_{0}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A}_{+}) \boxtimes \mathcal{C}_{0}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A}_{-})^{opp}$ . In order to distinguish it from the chiral case, we adopt capital letters for the two-dimensional case.

A Q-system is a triple  $(\Theta, W, X)$ , where  $\Theta$  has the general form

<span id="page-20-4"></span>
$$\Theta \simeq \bigoplus_{\rho,\sigma} Z_{\sigma,\tau} \cdot \sigma \otimes \tau. \tag{4.13}$$

The multiplicity matrix Z, coupling the left- and the right-moving representations, is also called the **coupling matrix**.

Thus, from a Q-system  $(\Theta, W, X)$ , one can construct an extension  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D} = \iota(\mathcal{A}_{2D})V$ . The charged fields are of the form  $\Psi^i_{\sigma \otimes \tau} = \iota(W^i_{\sigma \otimes \tau})^*V$  satisfying

$$\Psi^i_{\sigma \otimes \tau} a = (\sigma \otimes \tau)(a) \Psi^i_{\sigma \otimes \tau}$$

where  $\sigma \otimes \tau \prec \Theta$  are the irreducible subrepresentations of  $\Theta$ , and  $i = 1, \dots Z_{\sigma, \tau}$ .

In the case  $\mathcal{A}_{+} = \mathcal{A}_{-}$ , there is a distinguished extension of  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$  whose coupling matrix is the conjugation matrix.

<span id="page-21-1"></span>**Proposition 4.6.** [31] If  $C_0^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$  has finitely many inequivalent irreducible objects  $\rho$ , then there is a canonical Q-system R in  $C_0^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A})$  with

$$\Theta \simeq \bigoplus \rho \otimes \overline{\rho},$$

where the sum extends over the irreducible sectors of A. More precisely, choosing isometries  $T_{\rho} \in \operatorname{Hom}(\rho \otimes \overline{\rho}, \Theta)$ , one has  $W = d_R^{1/2} \cdot T_{id}$  and

$$X = d_R^{-1/2} \sum_{\rho,\sigma,\tau} \left( \frac{d_\rho d_\sigma}{d_\tau} \right)^{1/2} \cdot \Theta(T_\sigma) T_\rho \circ \left( \sum_a t_a \otimes t_{\overline{a}} \right) \circ T_\tau^*,$$

where the second sum extends over an orthonormal basis of isometries  $t_a \in \operatorname{Hom}(\tau, \rho\sigma)$  and  $t_{\overline{a}} \in \operatorname{Hom}(\overline{\tau}, \overline{\rho\sigma}) = j(t_a)$  with a suitable antilinear conjugation such that  $\overline{\rho} = j \circ \rho \circ j$  for all representatives. The dimension is  $d_R = \sqrt{\dim(\Theta_{\operatorname{can}})} = \sqrt{\sum_{\rho} \dim(\rho)^2}$ .

The charged operators  $\Psi_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}$  of the canonical extension are isometries if  $W_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}\in \mathrm{Hom}(\rho\otimes\overline{\rho},\Theta)$  are normalized as  $W_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}^*W_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}=\sqrt{\dim(\Theta)}/\dim(\rho)^2$  in accordance with Eq. (4.11).

The canonical Q-system can be defined in more general settings, e.g., as a Frobenius algebra in  $\mathcal{C} \boxtimes \overline{\mathcal{C}}$  where  $\mathcal{C}$  is a ribbon category and  $\overline{\mathcal{C}}$  its dual (with inverted morphisms) [25, Lemma 6.19], or in tensor categories without a braiding, replacing the conjugate by  $\rho^j = j \circ \rho \circ j$  [31, Prop. 4.10]. It is also referred to as **regular** because it shares certain properties with the regular representation of a group. In other contexts, the corresponding extensions are also knwon as "Cardy extension" or "Longo-Rehren subfactor".

We have

**Proposition 4.7.** [31] The canonical Q-system satisfies

$$\varepsilon_{\Theta,\Theta} \cdot X = X$$

i.e., it is commutative in  $C_0^{DHR}(A \otimes A)$ .

Thus, the canonical Q-system describes a local two-dimensional extension  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D}$  with charged fields  $\Psi_{\rho \otimes \overline{\rho}}$ .

# <span id="page-21-0"></span>4.7 Example 4: The local two-dimensional Ising model

The Ising model (without phase boundary) is a local extension of the theory  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$ , where  $\mathcal{A}$  is the Virasoro theory with  $c = \frac{1}{2}$ . The Q-system is the canonical Q-system (Prop. 4.5) given as follows. Let  $\tau$  and  $\sigma$  be localized in I, and  $O = I \times I$ . Choose any three isometries  $T_0$ ,  $T_1, T_2 \in (\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A})(O)$  satisfying  $T_i^*T_j = \delta_{ij} \cdot \mathbf{1}$ ,  $\sum_i T_i T_i^* = \mathbf{1}$ , and define

$$\Theta(a) = T_0 a T_0^* + T_1(\tau \otimes \tau)(a) T_1^* + T_2(\sigma \otimes \sigma)(a) T_2^*.$$

The intertwiners of the canonical Q-system are given by  $W := \sqrt{2} \cdot T_0$  and [31]

$$X = \left(\Theta(T_0)T_0T_0^* + \Theta(T_0)T_1T_1^* + \Theta(T_0)T_2T_2^* + \Theta(T_1)T_0T_1^* + \Theta(T_2)T_0T_2^* + \Theta(T_1)T_1T_0^* + \Theta(T_2)T_1T_2^* + \Theta(T_1)T_2(u \otimes u)T_0^* + \sqrt{2} \cdot \Theta(T_2)T_2(r \otimes r)T_0^* + \sqrt{2} \cdot \Theta(T_2)T_2(t \otimes t)T_1^*\right) / \sqrt{2}.$$

Properly normalizing  $W_{a\otimes a} = \sqrt{2}/\dim(a)\cdot T_a$ , one obtains isometric operators  $\Psi_{\tau\otimes\tau} = \iota(W_{\tau\otimes\tau})^*V$ and  $\Psi_{\sigma\otimes\sigma} = \iota(W_{\sigma\otimes\sigma})^*V$  satisfying the relations

$$\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau} a = (\tau \otimes \tau)(a) \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}, \quad \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} a = (\sigma \otimes \sigma)(a) \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$$

$$\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^* = \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}, \quad \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^* = \sqrt{2} (r^* \otimes r^*) \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma},$$

$$\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^2 = \mathbf{1}, \quad \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau} \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}, \quad \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau} = (u \otimes u) \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma},$$

$$(\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma})^2 = ((r \otimes r) + (t \otimes t) \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}) / \sqrt{2}.$$

(The first line holds by construction, the others follow by direct computation using Eq. (4.3), adapted to the case at hand, and the formulae from Example 2, Sect. 3.3.)

Then  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}(I \times I)$  is generated by  $\mathcal{A}_{2D}(I \times I)$  and  $\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}$  and  $\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$ . Shifting the localization by unitary charge transporters, as in Example 3, Sect. 4.5, one can explicitly verify local commutativity among all fields at spacelike distance.

One may add also a chiral Fermi field to this algebra, giving rise to a nonlocal extension  $\mathcal{A}_{\mathrm{2D}} \subset \mathcal{D}_{\mathrm{2D}}$  with  $\Theta \simeq (\mathrm{id} \oplus \tau) \otimes (\mathrm{id} \oplus \tau) \oplus 2\sigma \otimes \sigma$  containing the canonical local extension  $\mathcal{B}_{\mathrm{2D}}$ as an intermediate extension. The relations of this extension will be presented in Example 5, Sect. 5.3.

#### <span id="page-22-2"></span>Maximal local subtheories of nonlocal extensions

We introduce two maximal local extensions contained in a nonlocal extension.

As before, O may be a double cone in two dimensions, or an interval  $\subset \mathbb{R}$ , and O' the causal complement, resp. the complement in the chiral case. In the two-dimensional case, we denote the connected components of O' as  $W_L$  (the "left wedge") and  $W_R$  (the "right wedge"). In the chiral case, the two connected components are in fact halfrays, but we shall adopt the same notation  $W_L$  (for the negative=past halfray) and  $W_R$  (for the positive=future halfray). For wedge algebras (halfray algebras), Haag duality holds, namely  $\mathcal{A}(W') = \mathcal{A}(W)'$ .

Let  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}$  be an extension. We define

$$\mathcal{B}^+_{\mathrm{loc}}(O) := \mathcal{B}(W_L)' \cap \mathcal{B}(W_R'), \quad \text{resp.} \quad \mathcal{B}^-_{\mathrm{loc}}(O) := \mathcal{B}(W_R)' \cap \mathcal{B}(W_L').$$

These algebras are the relative commutants of the pair of algebras associated with the nested left resp. right wedges (past resp. future halfrays) defined by the double cone (interval) O.

<span id="page-22-1"></span>**Lemma 4.8.** (i)  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm}$  are Poincaré covariant isotonous nets of von Neumann algebras. (ii)  $\mathcal{B}$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{+}$ , and right-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{-}$ . Equivalently,  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{+}$  is right-local, and  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{-}$ 

- is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}$ .
- (iii) The nets  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm}$  are both local, and they are intermediate between  $\mathcal{A}$  and  $\mathcal{B}$ :

$$\mathcal{A}(O) \subset \mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm}(O) \subset \mathcal{B}(O).$$

In particular, one has

<span id="page-22-0"></span>
$$\mathcal{B}_{loc}^+(O) = \mathcal{B}(W_L)' \cap \mathcal{B}(O), \quad resp. \quad \mathcal{B}_{loc}^-(O) = \mathcal{B}(W_R)' \cap \mathcal{B}(O),$$
 (4.14)

where the wedges  $W_L$  and  $W_R$  are the left and right connected components of O'.

(iv) The nets  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm}$  are the maximal intermediate nets with the properties stated in (ii).

*Proof.* (i) Enlarging the double cone O, certainly decreases  $W_L$  and/or  $W_R$  and increases  $W'_L$  and/or  $W'_R$ . Therefore  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm}(O)$  increase with O ("isotony"). The Poincaré covariance of the constructions is manifest.

- (ii) Clear by definition.
- (iii) To prove locality, it suffices to note that for every pair of spacelike separated double cones, one is contained in the left component of the complement of the other, and the other is contained in the right component of the complement of the first. Locality then follows because the algebras are defined as relative commutants.

The inclusion  $\mathcal{A}(O) \subset \mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm}(O)$  is obvious from relative locality of  $\mathcal{B}$  w.r.t.  $\mathcal{A}$ . The inclusion  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm}(O) \subset \mathcal{B}(O)$  is not immediate because  $\mathcal{B}(W_R')$  is larger than  $\mathcal{B}(O)$ .

Consider an element b of  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^+(O) = \mathcal{B}(W_L)' \cap \mathcal{B}(W_R')$ . By Eq. (4.6),  $\mathcal{B}(W_R') = \mathcal{A}(W_R')\widehat{v}$  where  $\widehat{v}$  can be chosen in  $\mathcal{B}(O) \subset \mathcal{B}(W_R')$ . Thus  $b = a\widehat{v}$  with  $a \in \mathcal{A}(W_R')$ . Because b commutes with  $\mathcal{B}(W_L)$ , it commutes with  $\mathcal{A}(W_L)$ . But  $\widehat{v}$  commutes with  $\mathcal{A}(W_L)$  by relative locality, hence a must commute with  $\mathcal{A}(W_L)$ . Then,  $a \in \mathcal{A}(W_L')$  by Haag duality, and hence  $a \in \mathcal{A}(W_R') \cap \mathcal{A}(W_L') = \mathcal{A}(O)$ . Thus  $b \in \mathcal{A}(O)\widehat{v} = \mathcal{B}(O)$ . The argument is the same for  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^-$ . (iv) Is now clear from Eq. (4.14).

If  $\mathcal{B}$  is itself local, then obviously  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^+ = \mathcal{B}_{loc}^- = \mathcal{B}$ . Also the other extreme,  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm} = \mathcal{A}$ , may occur; e.g., the fermionic extension of the chiral Ising model (Example 3, Sect. 4.5) does not admit any local intermediate extension.

Let  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_1 \subset \mathcal{B}$  be any intermediate extension with Q-system  $(\theta_1, w_1, x_1)$ . Then  $\iota = \iota_2 \circ \iota_1$  and  $\theta_1 = \overline{\iota}_1 \iota_1 \prec \overline{\iota} \iota = \theta$ . Let  $p \in \text{Hom}(\theta, \theta)$  be the projection corresponding to  $\theta_1 \prec \theta$ . It is easy to see that

<span id="page-23-0"></span>
$$pw = w, p\theta(p)x = pxp = \theta(p)xp.$$
 (4.15)

In fact, every projection  $p \in \text{Hom}(\theta, \theta)$  satisfying Eq. (4.15) comes from an intermediate extension

$$\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_p \subset \mathcal{B}$$

where  $\mathcal{B}_p = \mathcal{A} \cdot pv$ . This is proven in [3, Sect. 4.4] for von Neumann algebras, and translates to local nets by  $\mathcal{B}_p(O) := \mathcal{A}(O) \cdot s^*v$  where  $p = ss^*$ ,  $s^*s = 1$ , and  $s^*\theta(\cdot)s$  is localized in O.

<span id="page-23-1"></span>**Lemma 4.9.**  $\mathcal{B}$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_1$  if and only if p satisfies

$$\theta(p)x = \varepsilon_{\theta,\theta} \cdot px. \tag{4.16}$$

 $\mathcal{B}$  is right-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_1$  if and only if p satisfies the same relation with  $\varepsilon_{\theta,\theta}$  replaced by  $\varepsilon_{\theta,\theta}^*$ .

Proof. For left locality, we have to consider the commutativity between  $\mathcal{B}(W_L)$  and  $\mathcal{B}_1(O)$  where O is some double cone (interval) and  $W_L$  is the left connected component of O'. Let  $\theta$  be localized in O, and choose a unitary  $u \in \text{Hom}(\theta, \widehat{\theta})$  with  $\widehat{\theta}$  localized in  $W_L$ . Then  $\mathcal{B}(W_L) = \mathcal{A}(W_L)uv$  as in Eq. (4.6). Let  $p = ss^*$  with an isometry  $s \in \mathcal{A}(O)$ , hence  $\theta_1$  is localized in O. Then we also have  $\mathcal{B}_1(O) = \mathcal{A}(O)v_1 = \mathcal{A}(O)s^*v = \mathcal{A}(O)s^*v = \mathcal{A}(O)pv$ .

Now,  $\mathcal{A}(O)$  commutes with  $\mathcal{B}(W_L)$  by relative locality, and  $\mathcal{A}(W_L)$  commutes with  $\mathcal{B}_1(O)$  by relative locality. Thus  $\mathcal{B}_1(O)$  commutes with  $\mathcal{B}(W_L)$  if and only if uv commutes with pv. We have

$$uvpv = u\theta(p)xv, \qquad pvuv = p\theta(u)xv = \theta(u)pxv.$$

Equality holds iff  $\theta(p)x = u^*\theta(u)px$ . But  $u^*\theta(u) = \varepsilon_{\theta,\theta}$ , so the claim follows.

We now claim that in terms of Q-systems, the above constructions  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^{\pm}$  correspond to the **centres of the Q-system** [16, Sect. 2.4]. The centre of a Q-system  $(\theta, w, x)$  (which in general does not satisfy the commutativity condition  $\varepsilon_{\theta,\theta}x = x$ ) is given by a projection p in  $\text{Hom}(\theta,\theta)$ , such that the associated intermediate Q-system  $(\theta_p, w_p, x_p)$  satisfies  $\varepsilon_{\theta_p,\theta_p}x_p = x_p$  and is maximal with this property. There are in fact two such projections,  $p^{\pm}$ , and hence two centres, defined by

$$\dim(\theta)^{\frac{1}{2}} \cdot p^{\pm} := r^* \theta(\varepsilon_{\theta\theta}^{\pm}) x^{(2)} \equiv \theta(r^*) \varepsilon_{\theta\theta}^{\mp} x^{(2)}, \tag{4.17}$$

where  $x^{(2)} = xx = \theta(x)x \in \text{Hom}(\theta, \theta^3)$  and  $r = xw \in \text{Hom}(\text{id}, \theta^2)$ . They satisfy the relations Eq. (4.15), and in addition

<span id="page-24-0"></span>
$$\theta(p^+)x = \varepsilon_{\theta,\theta} \cdot p^+ x, \qquad \theta(p^-)x = \varepsilon_{\theta,\theta}^* \cdot p^- x,$$
 (4.18)

and they are maximal to satisfy Eq. (4.18), i.e., for every other projection p satisfying the first resp. the second of Eq. (4.18), one has  $pp^+ = p$  resp.  $pp^- = p$ . The intermediate Q-system associated with  $p^+$  is called the **left centre**  $C^+[A]$  of  $A = (\theta, w, x)$ , the Q-system associated with  $p^-$  is called the **right centre**  $C^-[A]$ .

Eq. (4.18) entails  $\varepsilon_{\theta_n,\theta_n}x_p=x_p$  [16]. The proof can also be found in [3]. It follows

<span id="page-24-1"></span>**Proposition 4.10.** The intermediate extensions associated with the left resp. right centre of the Q-system for  $A \subset \mathcal{B}$  are  $A \subset \mathcal{B}^+_{loc} \subset \mathcal{B}$  resp.  $A \subset \mathcal{B}^-_{loc} \subset \mathcal{B}$ .

*Proof.* By Lemma 4.8,  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^+$  is intermediate between  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}$  and right-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B} \Leftrightarrow \mathcal{B}$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^+$ , and by definition, they are maximal with these properties. By Lemma 4.9, the associated intermediate projection p is the maximal projection satisfying Eq. (4.18). But these properties characterize the centre projection, hence  $p = p^+$ . Similar for  $\mathcal{B}_{loc}^-$ .

This result gives a simple interpretation of the "centres of a Q-system" in terms of local algebras, namely as the relative commutant of local algebras associated with nested wedges (in two dimensions) or lightrays (in chiral theories).

It also provides us a simple formulation of the locality condition required at a phase boundary:

<span id="page-24-3"></span>Corollary 4.11. An extension  $\mathcal{D}$  of  $\mathcal{A}$  implements a defect between  $\mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R$ , if and only if one has

$$\mathcal{B}^L \subset \mathcal{D}_{loc}^- \subset \mathcal{D} \supset \mathcal{D}_{loc}^+ \supset \mathcal{B}^R$$
.

*Proof.* By Prop. 4.10, we have  $\mathcal{D}_{loc}^+(O) \subset \mathcal{D}(O)$ , hence  $\mathcal{D}_{loc}^+(O) = \mathcal{D}(O) \cap \mathcal{D}(W_L)'$ . Then the defining properties of a defect,  $\mathcal{B}^R(O) \subset \mathcal{D}(O)$  and left-locality of  $\mathcal{D}$  w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}^R$ , are equivalent to  $\mathcal{B}^R(O) \subset \mathcal{D}_{loc}^+(O)$ . Similar for  $\mathcal{B}^L$ .

### <span id="page-24-2"></span>4.9 The braided product of two extensions

Suppose we have two extensions  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_1$  and  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_2$  with generating charged fields  $\psi_{1,\rho}$  ( $\rho \prec \theta_1$ ) and  $\psi_{2,\sigma}$  ( $\sigma \prec \theta_2$ ). The two extensions in general "live" on different Hilbert spaces, that are both DHR representations of the underlying algebra  $\mathcal{A}$ .

We want to construct an extension  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}$  containing both  $\mathcal{B}_1$  and  $\mathcal{B}_2$  as intermediate extensions. Because of the commutation relations  $\psi_{1,\rho}a = \rho(a)\psi_{1,\rho}$  and  $\psi_{2,\sigma}a = \sigma(a)\psi_{2,\sigma}$  that must also hold in  $\mathcal{D}$ , one may expect algebraic consistency problems. The following proposition shows that such a construction is canonically possible.

<span id="page-25-3"></span>**Proposition 4.12.** Let  $A_1 = (\theta_1, w_1, x_1)$  and  $A_2 = (\theta_2, w_2, x_2)$  be two Q-systems. Then the triples

$$(\theta_1, w_1, x_1) \times^{\pm} (\theta_2, w_2, x_2) = (\theta = \theta_1 \theta_2, w = w_1 w_2, x^{\pm} = \theta_1(\varepsilon_{\theta_1, \theta_2}^{\pm}) x_1 \theta_1(x_2))$$

$$(4.19)$$

define a pair of Q-systems denoted  $A_1 \times^{\pm} A_2$ . We call them (braided) product Q-systems, and denote the corresponding (braided) product of extensions by  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_1 \times^{\pm} \mathcal{B}_2 \equiv \mathcal{D}^{\pm}$ . Both product Q-systems  $A_1 \times^{\pm} A_2$  contain  $A_1$  and  $A_2$  as intermediate Q-systems, hence  $\mathcal{D}^{\pm}$  contain  $\mathcal{B}_1$  and  $\mathcal{B}_2$  as intermediate extensions:

$$egin{array}{cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc$$

 $\mathcal{D}^{\pm}$  can be characterized as the quotient of the free product of the algebras  $\mathcal{B}_1$  and  $\mathcal{B}_2$  by the relations  $\iota_1(\mathcal{A}) = \iota_2(\mathcal{A})$  and the commutation relations

<span id="page-25-0"></span>
$$v_2 v_1 = \varepsilon_{\theta_1, \theta_2}^{\pm} \cdot v_1 v_2. \tag{4.20}$$

Proof. The braided product of Q-systems can be found in [16, Sect. 3.2], and its defining relations are trivially verified. The projections  $p_1 = d_2^{-1}\theta_1(w_2w_2^*) \in \text{Hom}(\theta,\theta)$  and  $p_2 = d_1^{-1}w_1w_1^* \in \text{Hom}(\theta,\theta)$  define intermediate Q-systems according to [3, Sect. 4.4]. The reduced Q-systems coincide with  $(\theta_1, w_1, x_1)$  and  $(\theta_2, w_2, x_2)$ , hence both  $\mathcal{B}_1$  and  $\mathcal{B}_2$  are intermediate extensions with  $v_1 = \theta_1(w_2^*)v$  and  $v_2 = w_1^*v$ . Conversely,

$$v_1 v_2 = \theta_1(w_2^*) \cdot \theta_1 \theta_2(w_1^*) \cdot \varepsilon_{\theta_1, \theta_2}^{\pm} x_1 \theta_1(x_2) v = v,$$

by the unit property of Q-systems. Hence  $\mathcal{D}^{\pm}$  is generated by  $\mathcal{A}$  and  $v_1$  and  $v_2$ . The product  $v_2v_1$  is given by

$$v_2v_1 = w_1^* \cdot \theta_1\theta_2(\theta_1(w_2^*)) \cdot \varepsilon_{\theta_1,\theta_2}^{\pm} x_1\theta_1(x_2)v = \varepsilon_{\theta_1,\theta_2}^{\pm} v.$$

Comparing these identities, Eq. (4.20) follows.

**Remark 4.13.**  $A_1 \times^+ A_2$  is unitarily equivalent to  $A_2 \times^- A_1$  by the unitary  $\varepsilon_{\theta_1,\theta_2}$ .

Rewriting Eq. (4.20) in terms of the charged field decomposition of  $v_1$  and  $v_2$ , one has equivalently (again suppressing possible multiplicity indices)

<span id="page-25-1"></span>
$$\psi_{2,\sigma}\psi_{1,\rho} = \varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma}^{\pm} \cdot \psi_{1,\rho}\psi_{2,\sigma}. \tag{4.21}$$

Remark 4.14. In view of Eq. (4.12), these commutation relations are compatible with the transport, i.e., if they hold for any  $\rho$ ,  $\sigma$ , then they hold for every unitarily equivalent pair. In particular, as the statistics operators  $\varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma} = \mathbf{1}$  whenever  $\sigma$  is localized to the left of  $\rho$ , left (right) locality of  $\psi_1$  w.r.t.  $\psi_2$  implies Eq. (4.21) with the – sign (+ sign) for arbitrary localization of  $\rho$  and  $\sigma$ .

Therefore, we have

<span id="page-25-2"></span>**Proposition 4.15.** Within  $\mathcal{D}^+ = \mathcal{B}_1 \times^+ \mathcal{B}_2$ ,  $\mathcal{B}_1$  is right-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_2$ , whereas within  $\mathcal{D}^- = \mathcal{B}_1 \times^- \mathcal{B}_2$ ,  $\mathcal{B}_1$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_2$ . Every irreducible extension containing both  $\mathcal{B}_1$  and  $\mathcal{B}_2$  as intermediate extensions such that  $\mathcal{B}_1$  is right-local (left-local) w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_2$ , is a quotient of  $\mathcal{D}^+$  ( $\mathcal{D}^-$ ).

*Proof.* The first statement follows from Eq. (4.21) and the stated triviality of the statistics operator for charged fields with the respective relative localization, along with the fact  $\mathcal{A}$  is local and both  $\mathcal{B}_i$  are relatively local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{A}$ . The second statement is due to the fact that Eq. (4.21), or equivalently Eq. (4.20) is the only independent relation among the generators  $v_1$  and  $v_2$  of  $\mathcal{D}$ , using the multiplication law of the product Q-system.

Notice that even if both  $\mathcal{B}_i$  are local, neither  $\mathcal{D}^+$  nor  $\mathcal{D}^-$  will be local in general. However, we know how to construct maximal local subtheories in  $\mathcal{D}^{\pm}$  by the construction in the Sect. 4.8. Namely, one will have to determine the centre(s) of the braided product Q-systems. The following partial result is true without model specific knowledge.

<span id="page-26-0"></span>**Lemma 4.16.** If  $\mathcal{B}_2$  is local, then the right centre  $(\mathcal{D}^+)^-_{loc}$  of  $\mathcal{D}^+ = \mathcal{B}_1 \times^+ \mathcal{B}_2$  contains at least  $\mathcal{B}_2$ . The same is true for the left centre  $(\mathcal{D}^-)^+_{loc}$  of  $\mathcal{D}^- = \mathcal{B}_1 \times^- \mathcal{B}_2$ :

$$\mathcal{B}_2 \subset (\mathcal{D}^+)^-_{loc}, \qquad \mathcal{B}_2 \subset (\mathcal{D}^-)^+_{loc}.$$

Similarly, if  $\mathcal{B}_1$  is local, then

$$\mathcal{B}_1 \subset (\mathcal{D}^+)^+_{\mathrm{loc}}, \qquad \mathcal{B}_1 \subset (\mathcal{D}^-)^-_{\mathrm{loc}}.$$

Similar statements are in general not true for the other combinations, e.g.,  $\mathcal{B}_2$  local will not belong to the left centre  $(\mathcal{D}^+)^+_{loc}$  (= relative commutant of left wedges) of the  $\times^+$  braided product, or to  $(\mathcal{D}^-)^-_{loc}$ . See, however, the Sect. 4.10 for the local subtheories  $(\mathcal{D}^+)^+_{loc}$  when  $\mathcal{B}_1$  is chiral and  $\mathcal{B}_2$  is the canonical local extension.

*Proof.* This can be seen by inspection of Fig. 1: an element of  $\mathcal{B}_2$  in the double cone commutes with every element of  $\mathcal{B}_2$  in the right wedge because  $\mathcal{B}_2$  is local, and with every element of  $\mathcal{B}_1$  in the right wedge by Prop. 4.15.

**Fig. 1**: This figure visualizes the statement of Lemma 4.16: If  $\mathcal{B}_2$  is local, then the right centre (computed by relative commutants of right wedge algebras) of the braided product of  $\mathcal{B}_1$  and  $\mathcal{B}_2$  contains  $\mathcal{B}_2$  if and only if  $\mathcal{B}_2$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}_1$  (i.e., the braided product is the  $\times^+$  product by Prop. 4.15).

<span id="page-26-1"></span>**Lemma 4.17.** Let  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$ , where  $\mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A})$  is modular. If  $A_1$  is a chiral Q-system of the form  $A \otimes 1$ , i.e.,  $\mathcal{B}_1$  is a chiral extension  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} \subset \mathcal{B} \otimes \mathcal{A}$ , and  $A_2$  is the canonical Q-system R of Prop. 4.6, i.e.,  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} \subset \mathcal{B}_2$  is the canonical extension, then one has equality in Lemma 4.16:

$$(\mathcal{D}^+)^-_{loc} = (\mathcal{D}^-)^+_{loc} = \mathcal{B}_2.$$

Proof. One can compute the trace (cf. Sect. 4.1)  $\operatorname{Tr}(p^{\pm}) \equiv R^* p^{\pm} R = R^* \Theta(p^{\pm}) R$  of the centre projection. By using the fact that the braiding is non-degenerate, i.e.,  $\varepsilon_{\sigma,\rho} \varepsilon_{\rho,\sigma} = 1$  for all  $\rho$  implies  $\sigma = \operatorname{id}$ , one computes  $\operatorname{Tr}(p^{\pm}) = d_R^2 = \dim(R)$  for the left centre of the  $\times^-$  product, and for the right centre of the  $\times^+$  product. Therefore the canonical extension exhausts the centre projection.

#### <span id="page-27-0"></span>4.10 The $\alpha$ -induction construction and the full centre

A special case of the centre is the **full centre** [25, Def. 2.6]. If the braided category has only finitely many irreducible objects, then the canonical Q-system R (Prop. 4.6) is a commutative Q-system in  $C \boxtimes C^{\text{opp}}$ . Every Q-system A in C lifts trivially to a Q-system in  $C \boxtimes C^{\text{opp}}$  by tensoring with the identity as in Lemma 4.17. Then the (left) full centre of A is defined [16] as

<span id="page-27-1"></span>
$$Z^{+}[A] = C^{+}[(A \otimes 1) \times^{+} R], \tag{4.22}$$

i.e., the left centre of the  $\times^+$ -braided product of the lifted Q-system A with the canonical Q-system. The right full centre, defined analogously as  $Z^-[A] = C^-[(A \otimes 1) \times^- R]$ , is not independent: one has  $Z^-[A] = Z^+[\widehat{A}]$  where  $\widehat{A}$  is the Q-system  $(\theta, w, \varepsilon_{\theta, \theta} x)$ . In the sequel, "full centre" Z[A] will always mean the left full centre.

The full centre has many remarkable properties as a mathematical object of its own. In particular, it is a complete Morita invariant: if C is modular, then two Q-systems have the same full centre if and only if they are Morita equivalent [25, Thm. 1.1].

Here, we shall be interested only in its relevance for quantum field theory. (Recall that  $C^{\text{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$  is modular [24] for every completely rational theory, hence the full centre is indeed a Morita invariant.) The full centre of a Q-system A in the DHR category of a chiral net  $\mathcal{A}$  is a Q-system in  $C^{\text{DHR}}(\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A})$ , hence it describes a local extension of  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$ . By considering the algebraic interpretation Prop. 4.12 and Prop. 4.10 of the two steps: braided product and left centre, involved in the definition Eq. (4.22), the full centre extension is obtained by the corresponding steps:

- (i) Construction of a 2D nonlocal CFT as a braided product of a chiral extension with the canonical 2D local QFT, and
- (ii) restriction to a maximal local subtheory by taking relative commutants of the algebras associated with nested wedge regions.

It is therefore an instance of the combinations "(+,+)" and "(-,-)" not covered by Lemma 4.16.

Fig. 2a: Same as Fig. 1, with  $\mathcal{B}_1$  some chiral extension, and  $\mathcal{B}_2$  the canonical local extension. By nondegeneracy of the braiding, the right centre of the braided product (= relative commutant of right wedges) is exactly the canonical extension (Lemma 4.17).

Fig. 2b: The full centre of the chiral theory is the left centre (= relative commutant of left wedges) of the braided product with the canonical extension chiral extension. It equals the  $\alpha$ -induction construction from the chiral extension. It is in general different from, but may happen to be isomorphic to the canonical local extension. Being contained in the braided product, it is generated by certain products of canonical and chiral fields.

Fig. 3: Another view of Fig. 2.

It was recently recognized [2] that the full centre of the Q-system for the chiral extension  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}$  coincides with the " $\alpha$ -induction construction".

The latter is a generalization of the canonical Q-system (Prop. 4.6) for the construction of two-dimensional (2D) extensions [38]. It was found by solving the defining identities of a Q-system in  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A}\otimes\mathcal{A})$  with the help of  $\alpha$ -induction.  $\alpha$ -induction is a prescription to extend DHR endomorphisms  $\rho$  of the underlying chiral theory  $\mathcal{A}$  to endomorphisms  $\alpha_{\rho}^{\pm}$  of a chiral extension  $\mathcal{B}$  of  $\mathcal{A}$ . The latter depend on the braiding  $\varepsilon^{\pm}$ , and are in general not DHR endomorphisms. From these data, one obtains Q-systems with coupling matrix (Eq. (4.13))  $Z_{\sigma,\overline{\tau}} = \dim\mathrm{Hom}(\alpha_{\sigma}^+,\alpha_{\tau}^-)$ . If  $\mathcal{A}$  is completely rational, then Z is a modular invariant matrix [5].

This "arithmetic" construction may be regarded as not very satisfactory from the AQFT point of view. However, combining the above algebraic interpretation of the full centre, as well as the results in [2] and [33], we conclude:

**Corollary 4.18.** The following constructions of two-dimensional local extensions of  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$ , where  $\mathcal{A}$  is completely rational, are all equivalent:

- (1) The extension corresponding to the "full centre" of a chiral Q-system.
- (2) The "\alpha-induction construction" of a 2D local CFT associated with a (possibly nonlocal) chiral extension [38].
- (3) The construction of a 2D local CFT by "removing the boundary" via a limit state on a (hard) boundary CFT [33].
- (4) The construction of a 2D local CFT by the two steps (i) and (ii) above.

*Proof.* The equivalence  $(1) \Leftrightarrow (2)$  is established in [2], by identification of the Q-systems. The equivalence  $(2) \Leftrightarrow (3)$  was proven in [33]. The equivalence  $(1) \Leftrightarrow (4)$  is an immediate consequence of the definition of the full centre and the algebraic interpretation of the two operations involved, as discussed before.

Now, (4) provides a more satisfactory direct algebraic understanding (and in fact, a surprisingly simple one) of the previous indirect constructions (2) and (3) of two-dimensional extensions with modular-invariant coupling matrices Eq. (4.13).

Moreover, the construction (3) together with the maximality result for hard boundaries in [32] implies that every maximal irreducible local extension is of this form.

Let  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}$  be a chiral (non-local) extension and  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D}$  the 2D local CFT obtained by its full centre. Replacing R by the trivial Q-system in Eq. (4.22), we can conclude that  $C^+[A] \otimes 1$ 

is contained in the full centre  $Z^+[A]$ , i.e., there is an intermediate extension  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^+_{loc} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D}$ . Similarly, doing the same with the (-,-) case, we get  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{B}^-_{loc} \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D}$ . Together we recover the well-known tensor product of maximal chiral extensions:

<span id="page-29-3"></span>
$$\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_{loc}^{+} \otimes \mathcal{B}_{loc}^{-} \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D}. \tag{4.23}$$

#### 4.11 The relative commutant of product extensions

The braided product  $A_1 \times^{\pm} A_2$  of two irreducible Q-systems (dimHom(id,  $\theta_i$ ) = 1) will in general be reducible, because dimHom(id,  $\theta_1\theta_2$ ) = dimHom( $\theta_1, \theta_2$ ) > 1, cf. Sect. 4.2. For the corresponding extensions, this means  $\mathcal{A}' \cap \mathcal{D}^{\pm} \neq \mathbb{C} \cdot \mathbf{1}$  because, for  $\rho \prec \theta_1$  and  $\rho \prec \theta_2$ , operators of the form  $\psi_{1,\rho}^* \psi_{2,\rho}$  commute with every  $a \in \mathcal{A}$  by Eq. (4.10).

<span id="page-29-2"></span>**Proposition 4.19.** The relative commutant  $\mathcal{A}' \cap \mathcal{D}^{\pm}$  of the braided product extension  $\mathcal{D}^{\pm}$  is spanned by all operators of the form  $\psi_{1,\rho}^{n*}\psi_{2,\rho}^{m}$ , where  $\rho \prec \theta_1$ ,  $\rho \prec \theta_2$ , and  $n=1,\ldots$  dimHom $(\rho,\theta_1)$ ,  $m=1,\ldots$  dimHom $(\rho,\theta_2)$ . If both Q-systems  $A_1$  and  $A_2$  are commutative (hence the corresponding extensions  $\mathcal{B}_i$  are local), then the relative commutant  $\mathcal{A}' \cap \mathcal{D}^{\pm}$  coincides with the centre<sup>3</sup>  $\mathcal{D}^{\pm}' \cap \mathcal{D}^{\pm}$ .

*Proof.* In Lemma 4.5, we have characterized the relative commutant by the elements  $\iota(q)v$  with  $q \in \operatorname{Hom}(\theta, \operatorname{id})$ , where  $\theta = \theta_1\theta_2$  for a product Q-system. By Frobenius reciprocity, we have  $\operatorname{Hom}(\theta_1\theta_2, \operatorname{id}) = r_1^*\theta_1(\operatorname{Hom}(\theta_2, \theta_1))$ . A basis of  $\operatorname{Hom}(\theta_2, \theta_1)$  is given by  $w_{1,\rho}w_{2,\rho}^*$  with  $w_{i,\rho} \in \operatorname{Hom}(\rho, \theta_i)$ . With  $\psi_{1,\rho} = w_{1,\rho}^*\theta_1(w_2)^*v^{\pm}$  and  $\psi_{2,\rho} = w_1^*\theta_1(w_{2,\rho}^*)v^{\pm}$  (suppressing the symbols  $\iota$  for simplicity), one computes

$$\psi_{1,\rho}^* \psi_{2,\rho} = v^{\pm *} \theta_1(w_2) w_{1,\rho} w_1^* \theta_1(w_{2,\rho}^*) v^{\pm} = r^* \theta_1 \theta_2 (\theta_1(w_2) w_{1,\rho} w_1^* \theta_1(w_{2,\rho}^*)) x^{\pm} v^{\pm} = q v^{\pm}$$

with  $q = r_1^* \theta_1(w_{1,\rho} w_{2,\rho}^*)$ . Since  $q \in \text{Hom}(\theta_1 \theta_2, id)$  arises by Frobenius reciprocity from a basis  $w_{1,\rho} w_{2,\rho}^*$  of  $\text{Hom}(\theta_1, \theta_2)$ , the operators  $\psi_{1,\rho}^* \psi_{2,\rho}$  form a basis of  $\text{Hom}(\theta_1 \theta_2, \text{id}) v = \mathcal{A}' \cap \mathcal{D}$ .

In Lemma 4.5, we have characterized the centre by  $q \in \text{Hom}(\theta, \text{id})$  satisfying the supplementary relation Eq. (4.9). For  $q \in \text{Hom}(\theta_1 \theta_2, \text{id})$  one computes

$$qx^{\pm} = \theta_1(q)\varepsilon_{\theta_1,\theta_1}^{\mp}x_1\theta_1(x_2) = \theta_1(q)x_1\theta_1(x_2) = \theta_1(q)x_1\theta_1(\varepsilon_{\theta_2,\theta_2}^{\mp}x_2) = \theta_1\theta_2(q)x^{\pm}$$

if both Q-systems are commutative, using Eq. (4.8). Thus the supplementary condition Eq. (4.9) for the product Q-system is satisfied by every  $q \in \text{Hom}(\theta, \text{id})$ .

This result will become important in the treatment of phase boundaries (cf. Sect. 5).

Every minimal projection e in the centre of  $\mathcal{D}$  defines an irreducible representation  $\pi_e(\mathcal{D}) = e\mathcal{D}$  of  $\mathcal{D}$ , and hence also of the two intermediate local extensions  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_1$  and  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}_2$ .

### <span id="page-29-0"></span>5 Phase boundaries

As discussed in Sect. 3.6, causality at a phase boundary requires only that the local QFT to the left of the boundary is left-local w.r.t. the local QFT to the right of the boundary. Such situations are precisely constructed by the braided products of extensions.

This is in contrast to previous constructions, like Sect. 4.10, where braided product extensions were used as intermediate nonlocal constructions from which one has to descend to the left or right centre in order to get (globally) local subtheories.

<span id="page-29-1"></span><sup>&</sup>lt;sup>3</sup>The centre here is the algebraic centre of a C\* algebra, not to be confused with the centre of a Q-system!

#### 5.1 The universal construction

A phase boundary is a transmissive boundary with chiral observables  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A}_{+} \otimes \mathcal{A}_{-}$ . The phases on both sides of the boundary are given by a pair of Q-systems  $A^{L} = (\Theta^{L}, W^{L}, X^{L})$  and  $A^{R} = (\Theta^{R}, W^{R}, X^{R})$  in  $\mathcal{C}_{0}^{\text{DHR}}(\mathcal{A}_{2D})$ , describing local 2D extensions  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D}^{L}$  and  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} \subset \mathcal{B}_{2D}^{R}$ .

Now consider the braided product Q-systems (cf. Sect. 4.9)

$$(\Theta = \Theta^L \circ \Theta^R, W = W^L \times W^R, X = (1 \times \varepsilon_{\Theta^L, \Theta^R}^{\pm} \times 1) \circ (X^L \times X^R))$$
 (5.1)

and the corresponding extensions  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} \subset \mathcal{D}_{2D}^{\pm}$ . The original extensions  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^{L}$ ,  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^{R}$  are intermediate, cf. Sect. 4.9:

$$\mathcal{A}_{\mathrm{2D}} \subset \mathcal{B}_{\mathrm{2D}}^{L} \subset \mathcal{D}_{\mathrm{2D}}^{\pm} \qquad \mathcal{A}_{\mathrm{2D}} \subset \mathcal{B}_{\mathrm{2D}}^{R} \subset \mathcal{D}_{\mathrm{2D}}^{\pm},$$
 (5.2)

and the nets  $\mathcal{D}_{2D}^{\pm}$  are generated by  $\mathcal{A}_{2D}$  and two sets of charged fields  $\Psi_{\sigma\otimes\tau}^L$  ( $\sigma\otimes\tau\prec\Theta^L$ ) and  $\Psi_{\sigma\otimes\tau}^R$  ( $\sigma\otimes\tau\prec\Theta^R$ ), suppressing possible multiplicity indices. The braided product Q-system determines their commutation relations among each other as in Eq. (4.21):

<span id="page-30-2"></span>
$$\Psi^{R}_{\sigma \otimes \tau} \Psi^{L}_{\sigma' \otimes \tau'} = \varepsilon^{\pm}_{\sigma' \otimes \tau', \sigma \otimes \tau} \cdot \Psi^{L}_{\sigma' \otimes \tau'} \Psi^{R}_{\sigma \otimes \tau}. \tag{5.3}$$

By Eq. (3.3),  $\varepsilon_{\sigma'\otimes\tau',\sigma\otimes\tau}^- = \mathbf{1}$  whenever  $\sigma'\otimes\tau'$  is localized to the spacelike left of  $\sigma\otimes\tau$ . Thus, the choice of  $\varepsilon^-$  in Eq. (5.3) ensures that  $\mathcal{B}^L$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}^R$ , as required by causality. In accord with Prop. 4.15, this dictates our choice of the braided product Q-system to be

<span id="page-30-3"></span>
$$(\Theta^L, W^L, X^L) \times^- (\Theta^R, W^R, X^R), \tag{5.4}$$

or – equivalently –  $(\Theta^R, W^R, X^R) \times^+ (\Theta^L, W^L, X^L)$ .

The conclusion is our main structural result:

<span id="page-30-1"></span>**Proposition 5.1.** ("Universal construction") The extension  $\mathcal{D}$  of  $\mathcal{A}$  defined by the Q-system Eq. (5.4) implements a boundary condition in the sense of Def. 3.2. It is universal in the sense that every irreducible boundary condition appears as a representation of  $\mathcal{D}$ .

*Proof.* By Prop. 4.12,  $\mathcal{D}$  is generated by  $\mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R$ , and by Prop. 4.15,  $\mathcal{B}^L$  is left-local w.r.t.  $\mathcal{B}^R$ . The universal property follows because apart from the identification of the subalgebras  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^R$ , the commutation relation Eq. (4.20), i.e., left locality, is the only additional relation among the generators of  $\mathcal{D}$  imposed by the product Q-system, cf. Prop. 4.12.

### <span id="page-30-0"></span>5.2 Boundary conditions

The treatment of boundary conditions as defined in Def. 3.2 in this subsection is quite general. It applies to boundaries between two-dimensional conformal QFTs described by local extensions  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^R$  of  $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{A}_+ \otimes \mathcal{A}_-$ , as well as to "boundaries" between two chiral QFTs, i.e., two chiral QFTs  $\mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R$  which are local chiral extensions of an underlying local chiral net  $\mathcal{A}$ , separated by a point. Prop. 5.1 litterally applies also as a universal construction of boundary conditions for the latter case.

In Sect. 5.4, we shall present a more powerful result, Thm. 5.5, which only pertains to two dimensions. Namely, it covers the case when the underlying net is  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$  and  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^R$  are maximal two-dimensional local extensions, namely  $A^L$  and  $A^R$  both are full centres of chiral Q-systems.

For the remainder of this section, we drop the subscript distinguishing two-dimensional nets.

Let  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^R$  be the local extensions of  $\mathcal{A}$  defining the QFT to the left and to the right of the boundary. Let  $\mathcal{D} \equiv \mathcal{D}^-$  be the universal construction, namely the (nonlocal) extension obtained by the braided product  $A^L \times^- A^R$  of the corresponding commutative Q-systems  $A^L$  and  $A^R$ .

By Prop. 4.19, the extension  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}$  is in general reducible, and the relative commutant coincides with the centre  $\mathcal{D}' \cap \mathcal{D}$ . The central decomposition gives irreducible representations of  $\mathcal{D}$ , restricting to representations of both  $\mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R$  on a common Hilbert space.

Let  $\Theta^L = \bigoplus_{\rho} Z^L_{\rho} \cdot \rho$  and  $\Theta^R = \bigoplus_{\rho} Z^R_{\rho} \cdot \rho$  be the irreducible decomposition. (In the two-dimensional case, each  $\rho$  is of the form  $\rho^+ \otimes \rho^-$ .) By Prop. 4.19, the dimension of the centre is dim $\operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^L, \Theta^R) = \sum_{\rho} Z^L_{\rho} \cdot Z^R_{\rho}$ , and there are as many irreducible representations, implementing different boundary conditions.

<span id="page-31-1"></span>**Lemma 5.2.** Each minimal projection  $e \in \mathcal{D}' \cap \mathcal{D}$  defines an irreducible extension  $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{A}e \subset \mathcal{D}e$ . In particular, the representation  $\mathcal{D}e$  contains a unique vacuum vector.

*Proof.* Since every reduced Q-system contains the identity at least with multiplicity one, and the number of reduced Q-systems equals the multiplicity of the identity in  $\Theta = \Theta^L \Theta^R$ , it follows that dimHom(id,  $\Theta_e$ ) = 1 for each minimal projection. Therefore, the extension  $Ae \subset De$  is irreducible, and the vacuum representation of A is contained exactly with multiplicity one.

Together with the universality property, Prop. 5.1, we conclude

<span id="page-31-0"></span>**Corollary 5.3.** The minimal central projections of the braided product between two local QFTs classify the irreducible boundary conditions.

From Prop. 4.19, we know the centre as a linear space. A basis of this space (see below) are the "neutral" products of charged field operators of the form

<span id="page-31-2"></span>
$$B_{\rho} = \Psi_{\rho}^{L*} \Psi_{\rho}^{R}, \tag{5.5}$$

where  $\rho \prec \Theta^L$  and  $\rho \prec \Theta^R$ . These operators commute with  $\iota(\mathcal{A})$  and hence belong to the centre by Prop. 4.19. In an irreducible representation, they are multiples of 1. Thus, every representation comes with a characteristic set of relations between the charged fields  $\Psi^L_{\rho}$  and  $\Psi^R_{\rho}$ . These relations are the desired boundary conditions.

In order to determine the values of the central operators  $B_{\rho}$  in each representation, we need to compute  $B_{\rho}$  as linear combinations of the minimal central projections  $E_m$  in  $\mathcal{D}$ :

<span id="page-31-3"></span>
$$B_{\rho} = \sum_{m} \pi_{m}(B_{\rho}) \cdot E_{m}, \tag{5.6}$$

with  $\pi_m(B_\rho) \in \mathbb{C}$ . This meaning of the expansion coefficients follows because  $E_m$  is represented by 1 in the representation  $\pi_m$ , and by 0 in all other representations.

In order to determine the minimal central projections  $E_m$ , we need to know the centre as an algebra. At this point, a reformulation of the task is convenient.

We introduce the linear bijection

$$\chi: \operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L) \to \mathcal{D}' \cap \mathcal{D}, \qquad T \mapsto \iota(R^{L*}\Theta^L(T)) \cdot V.$$
(5.7)

Then one has

$$\chi(T_1) \cdot \chi(T_2) = \chi(T_1 * T_2) \tag{5.8}$$

where the associative \*-product in  $\operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L)$  is defined as

$$T_1 * T_2 := X^{L*} \cdot \Theta^L(T_1) T_2 \cdot X^R \equiv X^{L*} \cdot T_2 \Theta^R(T_1) \cdot X^R. \tag{5.9}$$

This associative product is also commutative, because the Q-systems  $A^L$  and  $A^R$  are commutative. The unit of the \*-product is  $W^LW^{R*}$ . Furthermore,

<span id="page-32-0"></span>
$$\chi(T)^* = \chi(F(T^*)) \tag{5.10}$$

where  $F: \operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^L, \Theta^R) \to \operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L)$  is the Frobenius conjugation  $T^* \mapsto R^{R*}\Theta^R(T^*R^L) = \Theta^L(R^{R*}T^*)R^L$ .

Thus, the task is to find  $I_m = \chi^{-1}(E_m)$  which are the minimal projections in  $\text{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L)$  with respect to the \*-product, and expand  $\chi^{-1}(B_\rho)$  in terms of  $I_m$ .

Let  $\Psi^L_{\rho} = W^{L*}_{\rho}\Theta^L(W^{R*})V$ ,  $\Psi^R_{\rho} = W^{R*}_{\rho}W^LV$  with  $W^Y_{\rho} \in \operatorname{Hom}(\rho, \Theta^Y)$  (Y = L, R), as in Sect. 4.4. We suppress possible multiplicity indices if these spaces are more than one-dimensonal, and assume the charged field operators to be isometries, i.e.,  $W^Y_{\rho}$  are normalized as  $W^{Y*}_{\rho}W^Y_{\rho} = d_Y/\dim(\rho)$  in accordance with Eq. (4.11).  $d_Y = \sqrt{\dim(\Theta^Y)}$  are the dimensions of the factor Q-systems.

By Frobenius reciprocity  $W_{\overline{\rho}}^Y := R_{\overline{\rho}}^* \rho(W_{\overline{\rho}}^{Y*} R^Y) = \Theta^Y(R_{\overline{\rho}}^* W^{Y*}) R^Y \in \text{Hom}(\rho, \Theta^Y)$  with the same normalization, and  $\Psi_{\overline{\rho}}^Y$  and  $B_{\overline{\rho}}$  are the corresponding charged fields and central operators.

In particular, Eq. (5.5) turns into

<span id="page-32-1"></span>
$$B_{\rho} \equiv \Psi_{\rho}^{L*} \Psi_{\rho}^{R} = \chi(W_{\rho}^{L} W_{\rho}^{R*}). \tag{5.11}$$

Since  $W_{\rho}^{L}W_{\rho}^{R*}$  span  $\operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^{R},\Theta^{L})$ ,  $B_{\rho}$  span  $\mathcal{D}'\cap\mathcal{D}$ .

The following proposition gives the algebraic relations among  $B_{\rho}$  in terms of the pair of Q-systems  $A^{L}$ ,  $A^{R}$ . Knowing their algebra, one can compute their decomposition into central projections.

<span id="page-32-2"></span>**Proposition 5.4.** The algebraic relations of the centre  $\mathcal{D}' \cap \mathcal{D}$  of the braided product of two local extensions (corresponding to two commutative Q-systems) are

<span id="page-32-3"></span>
$$B_{\rho}^* = B_{\overline{\rho}}, \qquad B_{\rho} \cdot B_{\sigma} = \sum_{\tau \prec \rho\sigma} f_{\rho,\sigma}^{\tau} \cdot B_{\tau}$$
 (5.12)

where

$$f_{\rho,\sigma}^{\tau} = f_{\sigma,\rho}^{\tau} = \frac{\dim(\tau)^2}{d_L d_R} \cdot W_{\tau}^{L*} \cdot \left( (W_{\rho}^L W_{\rho}^{R*}) * (W_{\sigma}^L W_{\sigma}^{R*}) \right) \cdot W_{\tau}^R.$$

The expressions given for  $f_{\rho,\sigma}^{\tau}$  are self-intertwiners  $\in \text{Hom}(\tau,\tau)$ , hence multiples of 1.

*Proof.* We give only a sketch of the proof. The first relation follows, in view of Eq. (5.10), from  $F(W_{\rho}^R W_{\rho}^{L*}) = W_{\overline{\rho}}^L W_{\overline{\rho}}^{R*}$ . The second relation is just the expansion of  $(W_{\rho}^L W_{\rho}^{R*}) * (W_{\sigma}^L W_{\sigma}^{R*})$  in terms of  $W_{\tau}^L W_{\tau}^{R*}$ , by using the stated normalizations of  $W_{\rho}^Y$ , translated in view of Eq. (5.11).

Ш

Up to normalization factors, the coefficients  $f_{\rho,\sigma}^{\tau}$  are just products of the expansion coefficients  $\zeta^R$  and  $\overline{\zeta^L}$  of the Q-systems, as in in [31] or [38]. The possible multiplicity indices are easily restored in Prop. 5.4, just remembering that each  $B_{\rho}$  becomes a tensor.

In the two-dimensional case, if  $\mathcal{A}_{+} = \mathcal{A}_{-}$  is completely rational and both Q-systems in the proposition equal the canonical Q-system in the category  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A}) \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})^{\mathrm{opp}}$ , each sector is of the form  $\rho \otimes \overline{\rho}$ , there are no multiplicities, and the coefficients simplify drastically:

$$f_{\rho \otimes \overline{\rho}, \sigma \otimes \overline{\sigma}}^{\tau \otimes \overline{\tau}} = \frac{\dim(\tau)}{\dim(\rho)\dim(\sigma)} \cdot N_{\rho\sigma}^{\tau}. \tag{5.13}$$

Thus the central operators  $\dim(\rho)B_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}$  represent the fusion rules. This implies that the various irreducible representations are labelled by the irreducible chiral sectors  $\sigma \in \mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A})$ , and Eq. (5.6) becomes

<span id="page-33-2"></span>
$$\pi_{\sigma}(\Psi_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}^{L*}\Psi_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}^{R}) = \frac{S_{\rho,\sigma}S_{0,0}}{S_{\rho,0}S_{0,\sigma}}$$

$$(5.14)$$

(where  $S_{0,\sigma} = S_{\sigma,0} = \dim(\sigma)/d_R$ ), thus giving certain angles between the isometric intertwiners  $\Psi^L$  and  $\Psi^R$ . In particular,  $\sigma = \operatorname{id}$  gives  $\Psi^{L*}_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}\Psi^R_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}} = \mathbf{1}$ , hence  $\Psi^L_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}} = \Psi^R_{\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}$ , i.e., the trivial boundary where the left and right fields coincide.

# <span id="page-33-0"></span>5.3 Example 5: Phase boundaries of the Ising model.

In the Ising model ( $\Theta^L = \Theta^R = \Theta_{\text{can}}$ ) everything can be computed explicitly:  $\mathcal{D}_{\text{2D}}$  is generated by  $\mathcal{A}_{\text{2D}}$  and  $\Psi^Y_{\tau \otimes \tau}$  and  $\Psi^Y_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$  (Y = L, R) satisfying the relations as in Example 4, Sect. 4.7 for both Y = L, R and mutual commutation relations

$$\begin{split} \Psi^R_{\tau \otimes \tau} \Psi^L_{\tau \otimes \tau} &= \Psi^L_{\tau \otimes \tau} \Psi^R_{\tau \otimes \tau}, \quad \Psi^R_{\tau \otimes \tau} \Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = (u \otimes u) \Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} \Psi^R_{\tau \otimes \tau}, \quad \Psi^R_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} \Psi^L_{\tau \otimes \tau} = (u \otimes u) \Psi^L_{\tau \otimes \tau} \Psi^R_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}, \\ \Psi^R_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} \Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} &= ((rr^* - itt^*) \otimes (rr^* + itt^*)) \Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} \Psi^R_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}. \end{split}$$

The centre of  $\mathcal{D}_{2D}$  is spanned by **1** and  $B_{\tau \otimes \tau} = \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^{L*} \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^{R}$  and  $B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L*} \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R}$ , satisfying  $B_{\tau \otimes \tau}^{2} = \mathbf{1}$ ,  $B_{\tau \otimes \tau} B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$ , and  $B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{2} = \frac{1}{2}(1 + B_{\tau \otimes \tau})$ .

Therefore, the minimal central projections are  $\frac{1}{2}(1 + B_{\tau \otimes \tau})\frac{1}{2}(1 \pm B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma})$  and  $\frac{1}{2}(1 - B_{\tau \otimes \tau})$ , and the ensuing relations in the three different quotients are, respectively:

The first case is the trivial boundary; the second the "fermionic" boundary where the field  $\Psi_{\sigma\otimes\sigma}$  changes sign, and the third the "dual" boundary, in which there are two independent fields  $\Psi^R_{\sigma\otimes\sigma}$  and  $\Psi^L_{\sigma\otimes\sigma}$  (corresponding to the order and disorder parameter  $\sigma$  and  $\mu$  in Example 1, Sect. 2.4). Notice that as a representation of either  $\mathcal{B}^L_{\text{2D}}$  or  $\mathcal{B}^R_{\text{2D}}$  (which are both isomorphic to the unique maximal local 2D Ising model), the Hilbert space Eq. (2.9) splits into two inequivalent representations.

#### <span id="page-33-1"></span>5.4 Classification of boundary conditions

In this subsection, we shall characterize the minimal central projections, and hence the irreducible boundary conditions, in a large class of models: the phase boundaries between two

extensions of  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$  that arise as full centres (=  $\alpha$ -induction constructions) of (possibly different) chiral extensions.

The following Thm. 5.5 provides a formula for the minimal central projections of  $\mathcal{D}' \cap \mathcal{D}$ . This formula allows to compute, in the corresponding irreducible representations, the numerical values  $\pi_m(\Psi_{\sigma\otimes\tau}^{L*}\Psi_{\sigma\otimes\tau}^R)$ , i.e., the angles between a pair of charged fields at the boundary, without explicitly diagonalizing the algebra Eq. (5.12). In particular, explicit knowledge of the coefficients  $\zeta$  of the Q-systems is not needed.

In general, not only signs will appear as boundary conditions. E.g., in models with a chiral sector of dimension  $\dim(\sigma) = \gamma = \frac{1}{2}(1+\sqrt{5})$  (the golden ratio) satisfying the fusion rules  $\sigma^2 \sim \operatorname{id} \oplus \sigma$ , it follows from Eq. (5.14) that  $B^2_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = \gamma^{-2} \cdot \mathbf{1} + \gamma^{-1} \cdot B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$ . This implies that the spectrum of  $B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$  is  $\{1, -\gamma^{-2} = \gamma - 2\}$ . In the eigenspace  $B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = \mathbf{1}$  one has  $\Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = \Psi^R_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$ , while in the eigenspace  $B_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = -\gamma^{-2}$  the two charged fields  $\Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$  and  $\Psi^R_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$  stand at an angle of  $\operatorname{arccos}(-\gamma^{-2}) \approx 112.5^\circ$  in the two-dimensional space  $H_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$  of charged fields.

For Thm. 5.5, we have to assume that  $\mathcal{A}_+ = \mathcal{A}_-$  and that its DHR category  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$  is modular. (It trivially extends to the case when  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A}_+)$  and  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A}_-)$  are isomorphic modular categories.) Recall that modularity is automatic if the chiral theory  $\mathcal{A}$  is completely rational [24], and is satisfied for all minimal (c < 1 Virasoro) models and for many current algebra models associated with semisimple Lie algebras [41] (maybe all), and many other related models [30, 36]. This theorem, including the special case Eq. (5.14), is the only place where we assume modularity. We also assume that the local extensions  $\mathcal{B}^Y_{2D}$  (Y = L, R) on both sides of the boundary are irreducible maximal extensions. These are precisely those extensions whose Q-systems are full centres of irreducible chiral Q-systems, cf. Sect. 4.10, thus we assume that the Q-systems for  $\mathcal{A}_{2D} = \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}^Y_{2D}$  are given as

$$(\Theta^L,W^L,X^L)=Z[A], \qquad (\Theta^R,W^R,X^R)=Z[B].$$

The chiral Q-systems  $A = (\theta^A, w^A, x^A)$  and  $B = (\theta^B, w^B, x^B)$  can be different, and they may belong to different Morita equivalence classes.

In order to find the minimal projections  $I_m$  in  $\operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L)$  w.r.t. the \*-product, such that  $E_m = \chi(I_m)$  are the minimal projections in the centre  $\mathcal{D}'_{2D} \cap \mathcal{D}_{2D}$ , we have to solve the three equations

<span id="page-34-1"></span>self-adjointness: 
$$I_m^* = F(I_m)$$
  
idempotency:  $I_m * I_{m'} = \delta_{mm'} \cdot I_m$ , (5.15)  
completeness:  $\sum_m I_m = W^L W^{R*}$ .

Minimality is then automatically ensured if the number of  $I_m$  exhausts the dimension of the centre  $\dim(\mathcal{D}'_{2D} \cap \mathcal{D}_{2D}) = \dim \operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L) = \operatorname{Tr}(Z^{Lt}Z^R)$ . Having found the intertwiners  $I_m$  corresponding to the central projections, we obtain the values (= boundary conditions)  $\pi_m(B_\rho)$  from the expansion

<span id="page-34-2"></span>
$$W_{\rho}^{L}W_{\rho}^{R*} = \sum_{m} \pi_{m}(B_{\rho}) \cdot I_{m}$$
 (5.16)

which is the same as Eq. (5.6) under the linear bijection  $\chi$ .

We can now state the main classification result.

<span id="page-34-0"></span>**Theorem 5.5.** (cf. also [3, Thm. 4.44]) Let A be a completely rational chiral CFT net, and  $C = C^{DHR}(A)$  its (modular  $C^*$  tensor) DHR category. Let  $B^Y$  (Y = L, R) be two local chiral

extensions of  $A \otimes A$  whose commutative Q-systems  $(\Theta^Y, W^Y, X^Y)$  arise as full centres of chiral Q-systems  $A = (\theta^A, w^A, w^A)$  and  $B = (\theta^B, w^B, w^B)$ . Then the minimal projections  $I_m$  in  $[\text{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L), *]$  (i.e., the solutions to the system Eq. (5.15)) are given by the operators

<span id="page-35-0"></span>
$$I_{\mathbf{m}} = \frac{\dim(\beta)}{d_A^2 d_B^2 d_R^2} \cdot D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|_Z}$$

$$\tag{5.17}$$

where  $\mathbf{m} = (\beta, m)$  run over the equivalence classes of irreducible A-B-bimodules.

Consequently,  $E_{\mathbf{m}} = \chi(I_{\mathbf{m}})$  are the minimal central projections in  $\mathcal{D}' \cap \mathcal{D}$  that classify the irreducible boundary conditions according to Cor. 5.3.

We shall define the operators  $D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|Z}$  below, but we shall not give a complete proof, which can be found in the review [3, Sect. 4.12]. The result is actually implicit in [16, 25], but our proof in [3] is more streamlined and benefits from substantial simplifications, that apply in the present case of categories of homomorphisms of C\* algebras, but that are not assumed in [16, 25]. Namely, to establish the orthogonality of the projections one has to prove that a certain operator Q vanishes; because Q is a positive operator, it is sufficient to show that a faithful positive trace vanishes on Q, cf. [3, p. 73].

Here, we mainly want to explain the notions of the Theorem, and how it can be used to compute the boundary conditions, i.e., the values  $\pi_{\mathbf{m}}(B_{\varrho}) \in \mathbb{C}$ .

 $A\text{-}B\text{-}\mathrm{bimodules}$  between Q-systems A and B in a C\* tensor category  $\mathcal C$  are, in terms of the category, pairs  $\mathbf m = (\beta, m)$  where  $\beta$  is an object of  $\mathcal C$  and  $m \in \mathrm{Hom}(\theta^A\beta\theta^B)$  subject to relations, cf. [3]. In the case of  $\mathcal C$  a full subcategory of  $\mathrm{End}_0(N)$ , and A and B corresponding to extensions  $N \subset M^A$  and  $N \subset M^B$  according to Thm. 4.2, respectively, a bimodule is equivalent to a homomorphism  $\varphi: M^B \to M^A$  such that  $\beta = \overline{\iota}^A \circ \varphi \circ \iota^A$  and  $m = \overline{\iota}(v^A\beta(v^B))$ . Conversely, every homomorphism  $\varphi: M^B \to M^A$  corresponds to a bimodule, provided  $\varphi \prec \overline{\iota}^A \rho \iota^B$  for some  $\rho \in \mathcal C$ . In particular, a Q-system A is an  $A\text{-}A\text{-}\mathrm{bimodule}$  in a natural way with  $\varphi = \mathrm{id}_M$ , hence  $m = x^{(2)} \equiv x \cdot x$ .

The A-B-bimodules for a given pair A, B form again a category, i.e., one can define intertwiners  $\in$  Hom $(\mathbf{m}_1, \mathbf{m}_2)$ , with which equivalence, inclusion, and direct sums of bimodules can be defined. A-B-bimodules can be tensored with B-C-bimodules giving rise to A-C-bimodules  $\mathbf{m}_{AB} \otimes_B \mathbf{m}_{BC}$ . One arrives at a (non-strict) 2- category whose objects are the Q-systems, the 1-morphisms are the bimodules, and the 2-morphisms are the bimodule intertwiners. In fact, up to unitary equivalence, the notions of inclusion, direct sum, and tensor product of bimodules coincide with the corresponding notions of inclusion, direct sum, and composition in the (strict) 2-category of homomorphisms as in Sect. 4.1.

We now assume that  $\mathcal{C}$  is braided, as is the case for  $\mathcal{C} = \mathcal{C}^{DHR}(\mathcal{A})$ . With an A-B-bimodule  $\mathbf{m} = (\beta, m)$ , one can associate an intertwiner  $D_{\mathbf{m}} \in \text{Hom}(\theta^B, \theta^A)$  as follows. With  $m \in \text{Hom}(\beta, \theta^A \beta \theta^B)$ , one has  $\varepsilon_{\theta^A, \beta} \theta^A \beta(r^{B*}) m \in \text{Hom}(\beta \theta^B, \beta \theta^A)$ . Then the inertwiners

<span id="page-35-1"></span>
$$D_{\mathbf{m}} := r_{\beta}^* \overline{\beta} (\varepsilon_{\theta^A,\beta} \theta^A \beta(r^{B*}) m) r_{\beta} \in \text{Hom}(\theta^B, \theta^A)$$
 (5.18)

with  $r_{\beta} \in \text{Hom}(\text{id}, \overline{\beta}\beta)$  (part of) a standard solution to the conjugacy relations for  $\beta, \overline{\beta}$ , do not depend on the standard solution, and depend on  $\mathbf{m}$  only through its equivalence class as a bimodule. Moreover, these operators form a "representation" of the tensor category of bimodules in the sense that one has  $D_{\mathbf{m}}^* = D_{\overline{\mathbf{m}}}$  and

<span id="page-35-2"></span>
$$D_{\mathbf{m}_{AB}}D_{\mathbf{m}_{BC}} = d_B \cdot D_{\mathbf{m}_{AB} \otimes_B \mathbf{m}_{BC}} = d_B \cdot \sum_{\mathbf{m}_{AC}} \dim \operatorname{Hom}(\mathbf{m}_{AC}, \mathbf{m}_{AB} \otimes_B \mathbf{m}_{BC}) \cdot D_{\mathbf{m}_{AC}}$$
 (5.19)

where the sum extends over the equivalence classes of irreducible A-C-bimodules.

Passing from  $\mathcal{C}$  to  $\mathcal{C} \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{\text{opp}}$ , a Q-system A in  $\mathcal{C}$  trivially defines a Q-system  $A \otimes 1$  in  $\mathcal{C} \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{\text{opp}}$ . Similarly, A-B-bimodules lift to  $A \otimes 1$ - $B \otimes 1$ -bimodules. The braided product of Q-systems gives rise to a braided product of bimodules, so that one can define the R[A]-R[B]-bimodule

$$R[\mathbf{m}] := (\mathbf{m} \otimes 1) \times^+ \mathbf{R},$$

where **R** is the canonical Q-system R in  $\mathcal{C} \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{\text{opp}}$  regarded as an R-R-bimodule, and  $R[A] = (A \otimes 1) \times^+ R$ . The full centre Z[A] is an intermediate Q-system of R[A]. One can then restrict  $R[\mathbf{m}]$  to the full centres Z[A] and Z[B] giving rise to a Z[A]-Z[B]-bimodule denoted by  $R(\mathbf{m})|_Z$ .

Now,  $D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|_Z} \in \text{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L)$  in Eq. (5.17) is just Eq. (5.18) for the Z[A]-bimodule  $R(\mathbf{m})|_Z$ , where  $\mathbf{m}$  is an irreducible A-B-bimodule.

The number of inequivalent irreducible A-B-bimodules is known [12]. Namely, if  $\Theta^L = \bigoplus_{\sigma,\tau} Z^L_{\sigma,\tau} \cdot \sigma \otimes \tau$  and  $\Theta^R = \bigoplus_{\sigma,\tau} Z^R_{\sigma,\tau} \cdot \sigma \otimes \tau$ , then this number is  $\text{Tr}(Z^{Lt}Z^R)$  which equals the dimension of the centre dimHom $(\Theta^R, \Theta^L)$ . Thus, provided  $D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|_Z}$  are linearly independent, they form a basis of  $\text{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L)$ .

Using the non-degeneracy property of the braiding in a modular category, one proves that they are indeed linearly independent, and in fact orthogonal w.r.t. the scalar product

<span id="page-36-1"></span>
$$(D_1, D_2) := R^{R*} \cdot D_1^* D_2 \cdot R^R = R^{L*} \cdot D_2 D_1^* \cdot R^L, \tag{5.20}$$

namely (e.g., [3, Sect. 4.12])

$$(D_{R[\mathbf{m}_1]|_Z}, D_{R[\mathbf{m}_2]|_Z}) = d_A^2 d_B^2 d_R^4 \cdot \delta_{\mathbf{m}_1, \mathbf{m}_2}.$$

Using this fact together with the observation that the scalar product Eq. (5.20) is related to the \*-product by  $(D_1, D_2) = W^{L*} \cdot (F(D_1^*) * D_2) \cdot W^R$ , we can also prove [3] that, up to normalizations as given in Eq. (5.17),  $D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|_Z}$  solve Eq. (5.15).

As an interesting side-result one obtains [25, 3]

<span id="page-36-3"></span>**Proposition 5.6.** All full centre Q-systems Z[A] (A an irreducible Q-system in a modular tensor category C) have the same dimension

$$d_{Z[A]}^2 \equiv \dim(\Theta^{Z[A]}) \equiv \sum_{\sigma,\tau} Z_{\sigma,\tau} \dim(\sigma) \dim(\tau) = d_R^2 = \sum_{\rho} \dim(\rho)^2.$$

<span id="page-36-0"></span>where the sum extends over the equivalence classes of irreducible objects of C.

#### 5.5 Computation of the boundary conditions

Now, we turn to computing the values  $\pi_m(B_\rho)$ . W.r.t. the scalar product Eq. (5.20), also the basis  $T := W_\rho^L W_\rho^{R*}$  of  $\operatorname{Hom}(\Theta^R, \Theta^L)$  (with  $W_\rho^Y$  normalized as in Sect. 5.2) is orthogonal:

$$(T, T') = \frac{d_R^2}{\dim(\rho)} \cdot \delta_{T, T'}$$

(where the label T is understood to include the data  $\rho$  and possible multiplicity indices). Therefore, the passage from the normalized basis  $\frac{1}{d_A d_B d_R^2} \cdot D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|_Z}$  to the normalized basis  $\frac{\sqrt{\dim(\beta)}}{d_R} \cdot T$  defines a unitary matrix

<span id="page-36-2"></span>
$$S_{\mathbf{m},T}^{AB} := \frac{\sqrt{\dim(\rho)}}{d_A d_B d_B^3} \cdot (D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|_Z}, T), \tag{5.21}$$

and hence

$$W_{\rho}^{L}W_{\rho}^{R*} \equiv T = \frac{d_{R}}{\sqrt{\dim(\rho)}} \sum_{\mathbf{m}} S_{\mathbf{m},T}^{AB} \cdot \frac{1}{d_{A}d_{B}d_{R}^{2}} \cdot D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|_{Z}} = \frac{d_{A}d_{B}d_{R}}{\sqrt{\dim(\rho)}} \sum_{\mathbf{m}} S_{\mathbf{m},T}^{AB} \cdot \frac{1}{\dim(\beta)} \cdot I_{\mathbf{m}}.$$

This is the desired decomposition Eq. (5.16), i.e., the central operators  $B_{\rho} = \Psi_{\rho}^{L*} \Psi_{\rho}^{R}$  take the values

<span id="page-37-0"></span>
$$\pi_{\mathbf{m}}(B_{\rho}) = \frac{d_A d_B d_R}{\dim(\beta) \sqrt{\dim(\rho)}} \cdot S_{\mathbf{m},T}^{AB} \qquad (\mathbf{m} = (\beta, m), \ T = W_{\rho}^L W_{\rho}^{R*}). \tag{5.22}$$

Corollary 5.7. The irreducible boundary conditions, i.e., the irreducible representations of  $\mathcal{D} = \mathcal{B}_{2\mathrm{D}}^L \times^- \mathcal{B}_{2\mathrm{D}}^R$  are labelled by the chiral bimodules between the chiral Q-systems whose full centres give rise to the extensions  $\mathcal{B}_{2\mathrm{D}}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}_{2\mathrm{D}}^R$ . The "angles"  $\pi_{\mathbf{m}}(\Psi_{\rho}^{L*}\Psi_{\rho}^R)$  between left and right fields are given by the matrix elements of the generalized S-matrix as in Eq. (5.22).

The remaining task is to find an efficient way to compute the matrix elements  $S_{\mathbf{m},\rho}^{AB}$ . First, we list some rather trivial special cases.

We have

$$S_{\mathbf{m}, \mathrm{id}}^{AB} = \frac{\dim(\beta)}{d_A d_B d_B}$$

for  $T = W^L W^{R*}$  the unit w.r.t. the \*-product. This just reflects the fact that  $\Psi_{id}^L = \Psi_{id}^R = \mathbf{1}$ , hence the corresponding operator  $B_{id}$  must be  $= \mathbf{1}$  in every representation.

For A = B (i.e., isomorphic QFT on both sides of the boundary), and  $\mathbf{m} = A$  as an A-A-module, one finds  $D_{R(A)|_Z} = d_A^2 d_R \cdot 1$ , hence

$$S_{A,\rho}^{AA} = \frac{\sqrt{\dim(\rho)}}{d_R}.$$

Consequently,  $\pi_A(B_\rho) = \mathbf{1}$  and hence  $\Psi_\rho^L = \Psi_\rho^R$  for all  $\rho$ . Thus, the trivial bimodule describes the trivial boundary.

For  $A = B = (\mathrm{id}, 1, 1)$  the Q-system of the trivial chiral extension  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{A}$ , the bimodules are just the irreducible chiral sectors  $\sigma \in \mathcal{C}$ . Since Z[A] = R is the canonical Q-system,  $\rho^+ \otimes \rho^-$  are of the form  $\rho \otimes \overline{\rho}$ , and one recovers the example Eq. (5.14)

$$S^{11}_{\sigma,\rho\otimes\overline{\rho}}=S_{\sigma,\rho}.$$

One may use further special properties of the matrix Eq. (5.21) in order to compute its matrix elements more efficiently than by evaluation of the defining scalar products. Namely, the property Eq. (5.19) lifts to  $R[\mathbf{m}]|_Z$ :

$$D_{R[\mathbf{m}_{AB}]|z}D_{R[\mathbf{m}_{BC}]|z} = d_B d_R^2 \cdot D_{R[\mathbf{m}_{AB} \otimes_B \mathbf{m}_{BC}]|z} = d_B d_R^2 \cdot \sum_{\mathbf{m}_{AC}} N_{\mathbf{m}_{AB}, \mathbf{m}_{BC}}^{\mathbf{m}_{AC}} \cdot D_{R[\mathbf{m}_{AC}]|z},$$

where we write the fusion rules of irreducible A-B-bimodules and B-C-bimodules as

$$\mathbf{m}_1 \otimes_B \mathbf{m}_2 \simeq \bigoplus_{\mathbf{m}_3} N^{\mathbf{m}_3}_{\mathbf{m}_1,\mathbf{m}_2} \cdot \mathbf{m}_3.$$

If we now express  $D_{R[\mathbf{m}]|_Z}$  in terms of the bases  $T = W_\rho^L W_\rho^{R*}$ , we arrive at

$$\sum_{T_1,T_2} S_{\mathbf{m}_1,T_1}^{AB} S_{\mathbf{m}_2,T_2}^{BC} \cdot \sqrt{\dim(\rho)} \cdot T_1 T_2 = \sum_{\mathbf{m}_3} N_{\mathbf{m}_1,\mathbf{m}_2}^{\mathbf{m}_3} \sum_{T_3} S_{\mathbf{m}_3,T_3}^{AC} \cdot T_3,$$

which can be solved for the fusion rules:

<span id="page-38-1"></span>
$$N_{\mathbf{m}_{1},\mathbf{m}_{2}}^{\mathbf{m}_{3}} = \sum_{T_{1},T_{2},T_{3}} \frac{\dim(\rho)^{3/2}}{d_{R}^{2}} (T_{3},T_{1}T_{2}) \cdot S_{\mathbf{m}_{1},T_{1}}^{AB} S_{\mathbf{m}_{2},T_{2}}^{BC} \overline{S_{\mathbf{m}_{3},T_{3}}^{AC}}.$$
 (5.23)

If there are no multiplicities (i.e., dimHom $(\rho, \Theta^Y) = 0$  or 1 for all Y = A, B, C), then  $(T_3, T_1T_2) = d_R^3 \dim(\rho)^{-2} \cdot \delta_{T_1, T_3} \delta_{T_2, T_3}$ , and Eq. (5.23) simplifies to the "generalized Verlinde formula"

$$N_{\mathbf{m}_{1},\mathbf{m}_{2}}^{\mathbf{m}_{3}} = \sum_{T} \frac{d_{R}}{\sqrt{\dim(\rho)}} \cdot S_{\mathbf{m}_{1},T}^{AB} S_{\mathbf{m}_{2},T}^{BC} \overline{S_{\mathbf{m}_{3},T}^{AC}}.$$
 (5.24)

In particular, for B = C, this becomes

$$N_{\mathbf{m}_{1},\mathbf{m}_{2}}^{\mathbf{m}_{3}} = \sum_{T} \frac{S_{\mathbf{m}_{1},T}^{AB} S_{\mathbf{m}_{2},T}^{BB} \overline{S_{\mathbf{m}_{3},T}^{AB}}}{S_{\mathbf{B},T}^{BB}},$$
(5.25)

and the unitary matrices  $S_{\mathbf{m},T}^{AB}$  diagonalize the fusion rules:

<span id="page-38-2"></span>
$$\sum_{\mathbf{m}_{1},\mathbf{m}_{3}} \overline{S_{\mathbf{m}_{1},T}^{AB}} N_{\mathbf{m}_{1},\mathbf{m}}^{\mathbf{m}_{3}} S_{\mathbf{m}_{3},T'}^{AB} = \frac{S_{\mathbf{m},T}^{BB}}{S_{\mathbf{B},T}^{BB}} \cdot \delta_{T,T'}.$$
 (5.26)

Because fusion rules are comparatively easy to compute with the help of Frobenius reciprocity, one may use Eq. (5.26) to determine the matrices  $S^{AB}$  (with some complication to be expected if there are multiplicities).

Together with Eq. (5.22), this completes the computation of the boundary conditions.

We want to stress that in this way, the boundary conditions are ultimately characterized by chiral data only, namely the fusion category of chiral bimodules, which are in turn the irreducible subobjects of  $\iota_L \circ \rho \circ \overline{\iota}_R$ ,  $\rho \in \mathcal{C}$ .

#### <span id="page-38-0"></span>5.6 Example 6: Chiral boundary fields in the Ising model

In the Ising model, the explicit computations of the algebra of charged operators at a phase boundary are sufficiently simple to be carried out by hand, by using the defining relations of the braided product Q-system and the relations of the Ising model given in the previous Examples 2–5, Sect. 3.3, Sect. 4.5, Sect. 4.7, Sect. 5.3.

Let us consider the operators

<span id="page-38-3"></span>
$$\psi_{+} := \sqrt{-i} \cdot \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L*}(u \otimes 1) \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R}, \qquad \psi_{-} := \sqrt{i} \cdot \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L*}(1 \otimes u) \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R}, \tag{5.27}$$

which are by construction chiral intertwiners:

$$\psi_+ a = (\tau \otimes \mathrm{id})(a)\psi_+, \qquad \psi_- a = (\mathrm{id} \otimes \tau)(a)\psi_- \qquad (a \in \mathcal{A}_{2D}).$$

Thus, they belong to the relative commutants  $(\mathbf{1} \otimes \mathcal{A})' \cap \mathcal{D}_{2D}$  and  $(\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathbf{1})' \cap \mathcal{D}_{2D}$ , respectively, and in fact the latter are generated by  $(\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathbf{1}) \vee \psi_+$  and  $(\mathbf{1} \otimes \mathcal{A}) \vee \psi_-$ , respectively. They satisfy the relations

$$\psi_{\pm}^* = \psi_{\pm}, \qquad \psi_{\pm}^2 = \frac{1}{2} (1 - \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^L \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^R), \qquad \psi_{+} \psi_{-} = -\psi_{-} \psi_{+} = \frac{i}{2} (\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^R - \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^L).$$

Thus, in the representations (i) and (ii) in Sect. 5.3,  $\psi_{\pm} = 0$ , while in the "dual" representation (iii), they are a pair of left- and right-moving selfadjoint unitary Fermi fields implementing the chiral automorphisms  $\tau$ , such that

$$\psi_+\psi_- = -\psi_-\psi_+ = i\Psi^R_{\tau\otimes\tau} = -i\Psi^L_{\tau\otimes\tau}.$$

The operator  $C_{\sigma} := \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L*}(u \otimes u)\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R} = \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L*}\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R}\Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}^{R}$  (by Sect. 4.7) is equal to  $\pm \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}$  in (i) and (ii), and vanishes in (iii). The operator product between  $\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L}$  and  $\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R}$  is computed as

<span id="page-39-0"></span>
$$\sqrt{2} \cdot \Psi^{L}_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} \Psi^{R}_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = (r \otimes r) B_{\sigma} + (t \otimes t) C_{\sigma} + \sqrt{i} \cdot (t \otimes r) \psi_{+} + \sqrt{-i} \cdot (r \otimes t) \psi_{-}, \tag{5.28}$$

which is  $= \pm (r \otimes r) \mathbf{1} + (t \otimes t) \Psi_{\tau \otimes \tau}$  in (i) and (ii), and  $= \sqrt{i} \cdot (t \otimes r) \psi_+ + \sqrt{-i} \cdot (r \otimes t) \psi_-$  in (iii).

We also compute, e.g.,  $\sqrt{i} \cdot \psi_+ \Psi^R_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = \frac{1}{2} (\Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} - \Psi^R_{\tau \otimes \tau} \Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma})$  which again vanishes in (i) and (ii) (because  $\Psi^R_{\tau \otimes \tau} = \Psi^L_{\tau \otimes \tau}$  and  $\Psi^L_{\tau \otimes \tau} \Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma} = \Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$ ), and equals  $\Psi^L_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}$  in (iii). We obtain

<span id="page-39-1"></span>
$$\Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L} = \sqrt{\pm i} \cdot \psi_{\pm} \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R}, \qquad \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{R} = \sqrt{\mp i} \cdot \psi_{\pm} \Psi_{\sigma \otimes \sigma}^{L}$$
 (5.29)

(valid in (iii)), thus expressing the left fields in terms of the right fields and the Fermi fields, and vice versa  $R\leftrightarrow L$ . This is the AQFT analogue of Eq. (2.6) and Eq. (2.7), when  $\Psi^R_{\sigma\otimes\sigma}$  is identified with the order parameter  $\sigma$  and  $\Psi^L_{\sigma\otimes\sigma}$  with the disorder parameter  $\mu$ .

It would be interesting to understand in the general case, whether and how chiral (nonlocal) fields emerge as certain products of fields from  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^L$  and from  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^R$  (i.e., as a subalgebra of a representation of the nonlocal braided product), as exemplified in Eq. (5.27), Eq. (5.28), and how, conversely, the local fields of  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^L$  can be represented as certain products of chiral fields and local fields from  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^R$  (and vice versa), as exemplified by Eq. (5.29).

#### 5.7 Classification of factorial defects for maximal local extensions

Recall from [32] that full centre extensions are maximal local extensions. Hence, in view of Cor. 4.11, for a defect between two full centre extensions  $\mathcal{B}^L$ ,  $\mathcal{B}^R$ , one has

$$\mathcal{B}^L = \mathcal{D}_{loc}^-$$
 and  $\mathcal{B}^R = \mathcal{D}_{loc}^+$ .

This implies

<span id="page-39-2"></span>**Lemma 5.8.** Let  $\mathcal{B}^Y$  (Y = L, R) be two local chiral extensions of  $A \otimes A$  whose commutative Q-systems  $(\Theta^Y, W^Y, X^Y)$  arise as full centres of chiral extensions.

Then all (not necessarily irreducible but) factorial defects between  $\mathcal{B}^L$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R$ , i.e., factorial extensions  $\mathcal{D} \supset \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}$  such that  $\mathcal{B}^L = \mathcal{D}^-_{loc}$  and  $\mathcal{B}^R = \mathcal{D}^+_{loc}$ , are Morita equivalent.

*Proof.* Let us apply the full centre construction (again) to  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}$  (for example we can see it as a time t = 0 net) to get an extension  $(\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}) \otimes (\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}) \subset \mathcal{D}^{(2)}$  given by a commutative Q-system Z[D] in  $(\mathcal{C} \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{\text{opp}}) \boxtimes (\mathcal{C} \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{\text{opp}})^{\text{opp}}$ .

Applying Eq. (4.23) to this construction, it follows that

$$(\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}) \otimes (\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}) \subset \mathcal{B}^R \otimes \mathcal{B}^L \subset \mathcal{D}^{(2)}. \tag{5.30}$$

But the dimension of  $(\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}) \otimes (\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A}) \subset \mathcal{B}^R \otimes \mathcal{B}^L$  by Prop. 5.6 is

$$d_{B^L \otimes B^R}^2 = \left(\sum_{\rho} \dim(\rho)^2\right)^2 = \sum_{\rho, \sigma} \dim(\rho \otimes \bar{\sigma})^2 = d_{Z[D]}^2,$$

thus coincides with the dimension of Z[D] by using Prop. 5.6 again. But this means we have  $\mathcal{B}^R \otimes \mathcal{B}^L = \mathcal{D}^{(2)}$ . Because two extensions are Morita equivalent if and only if they have isomorphic full centres [25] all extensions  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}$  with the stated property are Morita equivalent.  $\square$ 

<span id="page-40-0"></span>**Remark 5.9.** Let  $\mathcal{B}^Y$  (Y=L,R) be two local chiral extensions of  $\mathcal{A}\otimes\mathcal{A}$  whose commutative Q-systems  $A^Y$  arise as full centres of chiral Q-systems. The main result Prop. 4.3 in [25] is obtained by applying first the full centre and then the adjoint functor T. If we follow their strategy and apply the full centre to the Q-system of the extension  $\mathcal{A}\otimes\mathcal{A}\subset\mathcal{D}$  and then apply T, it is easy to check that we obtain the Q-system  $A^L\otimes^-A^R\cong A^R\otimes^+A^L$ .

Together with the previous Lemma 5.8 this gives a classification of irreducible defects as in Def. 3.2.

**Theorem 5.10.** Let  $\mathcal{B}^Y$  (Y = L, R) be two local chiral extensions of  $A \otimes A$  whose commutative Q-systems  $(\Theta^Y, W^Y, X^Y)$  arise as full centres of chiral Q-systems  $A^L = Z[A]$  and  $A^R = Z[B]$ . Then there is a one-to-one correspondence between factorial defects

$$(\mathcal{D}_{loc}^{-} =) \mathcal{B}^{L} \subset \mathcal{D} \supset \mathcal{B}^{R} (= \mathcal{D}_{loc}^{+}).$$

and equivalence classes of (not necessarily irreducible) A-B-bimodules. The defect is a boundary condition if and only if the bimodule is irreducible. In this case, the boundary condition is irreducible.

Proof. Because the index is finite, the relative commutant is finite. We can decompose the Q-system giving  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}$  into irreducible Q-systems. We first claim that each irreducible component is again a defect. Indeed, if we take an irreducible component  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}_i$ , then  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}$  and  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}_i$  are Morita equivalent by Thm. 4.3 and Lemma 5.8, hence they have the same full centre in  $(\mathcal{C} \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{\text{opp}}) \boxtimes (\mathcal{C} \boxtimes \mathcal{C}^{\text{opp}})^{\text{opp}}$ , and hence their maximal local subalgebras  $(\mathcal{D}_i)^+_{\text{loc}} \otimes (\mathcal{D}_i)^-_{\text{loc}}$  according to Eq. (4.23) coincide with  $\mathcal{D}^+_{\text{loc}} \otimes \mathcal{D}^-_{\text{loc}} = \mathcal{B}^R \otimes \mathcal{B}^L$ . In particular, each  $\mathcal{D}_i$  contains  $\mathcal{B}^L \vee \mathcal{B}^R$ , and hence is a defect, which is obviously irreducible. By Remark 5.9,  $\mathcal{D}_i$  is inside the central decomposition of the universal construction Prop. 5.1, and thus an irreducible boundary condition as classified in Thm. 5.5. Conversely, for every A-B-bimodule  $\mathbf{m}$  we decompose it as a direct sum

$$\mathbf{m} = \bigoplus n_i \mathbf{m}_i$$

of irreducible ones and obtain a factorial boundary condition by taking a corresponding "direct sum" as in Thm. 4.3 (with the same multiplicities) of the extensions  $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{D}_i$ . Notice that Thm. 4.3 applies thanks to Lemma 5.8.

We have already shown that if the bimodule is irreducible, that the defect is indeed an irreducible boundary condition. So let  $\bigoplus_i n_i \mathbf{m}_i$  be a reducible bimodule. We want to show that the corresponding defect  $A \subset D$  is not a boundary condition, i.e.,  $\mathcal{B}^L \vee \mathcal{B}^R \neq \mathcal{D}$ . But in this case we have intermediate inclusions  $\mathcal{A} \subset \bigoplus \operatorname{Mat}_{n_i}(\mathcal{B}^Y) \subset \bigoplus \operatorname{Mat}_{n_i}(\mathcal{D}_i) \subset \mathcal{D}$  for Y = L, R, thus  $\mathcal{B}^L \vee \mathcal{B}^R$  can generate at most  $\bigoplus \operatorname{Mat}_{n_i}(\mathcal{D}_i) \subsetneq \mathcal{D}$ . (They will actually generate only the diagonal subalgebras of the matrix algebras.) Thus  $\mathcal{D}$  is only a defect and not a boundary condition.

# <span id="page-41-0"></span>6 Outlook: boundaries and local gauge transformations

# 6.1 Spacelike boundaries?

One could attempt to repeat the same analysis for spacelike boundaries, i.e., t=0 lines in some Lorentz system, separating local QFTs  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^F$  (defined in the future of the boundary) and  $\mathcal{B}_{2D}^P$  (defined in the past) with a common subtheory including the stress tensor. Again, both nets extend to the entire Minkowski spacetime.

But in this case, causality requires that  $B_{2\mathrm{D}}^P$  and  $B_{2\mathrm{D}}^F$  must be mutually local, whereas the "universal construction"  $B_{2\mathrm{D}}^P \times^{\pm} B_{2\mathrm{D}}^F$  will in general not be local. An easy exercise shows that it is local if and only if  $\varepsilon_{\Theta^F,\Theta^P}^+ = \varepsilon_{\Theta^F,\Theta^P}^-$ .

On the other hand, the braided product may become local in some representations, e.g., if  $B_{2\mathrm{D}}^P = B_{2\mathrm{D}}^F$  this happens for the central projection induced by the trivial bimodule, giving rise to a quotient in which  $\Psi_\rho^F = \Psi_\rho^P$ , as in Sect. 5.5. It would be an interesting question to characterize all central projections which give rise to a local net.

#### 6.2 Four spacetime dimensions

Let us try and draw some lessons for four-dimensional QFT, although the situation departs from the present setting in several respects. This leads us to some speculative considerations concerning local gauge transformations in algebraic QFT.

In four dimensions, there is no distinction between "left" and "right", and the braiding is in fact a symmetry, i.e.,  $\varepsilon_{\sigma,\rho}^+ = \varepsilon_{\sigma,\rho}^-$ . Consequently, there is only one braided product, and the braided product of two local extensions of a net of observables is indeed local, namely the commutation relations

$$\Psi_{\rho}^{1}\Psi_{\sigma}^{2} = \varepsilon_{\sigma,\rho} \cdot \Psi_{\sigma}^{2}\Psi_{\rho}^{1}$$

derived from the braided product imply that the generating charged fields  $\Psi^1_{\rho}$  and  $\Psi^2_{\sigma}$  commute whenever  $\rho$  and  $\sigma$  are localized at spacelike distance.

Causality at a timelike boundary requires "left locality" as before. But left locality implies mutual locality of the QFTs on either side of the boundary, and the braided product is again a universal construction. One may as well admit spacelike boundaries, since (unlike in two dimensions, cf. Sect. 6.1) they do not require stronger locality properties than timelike boundaries.

Indeed, the original development of the DHR theory of superselection sectors was aimed at physical spacetime, and conformal symmetry was not assumed. Also in our previous analysis, conformal symmetry was not directly used, it only served to guarantee the existence of chiral observables so that the structure  $C^{\text{DHR}}(\mathcal{A}_{+} \otimes \mathcal{A}_{-}) = C^{\text{DHR}}(\mathcal{A}_{+}) \boxtimes C^{\text{DHR}}(\mathcal{A}_{-})^{\text{opp}}$  arises which became essential for the classification of boundary conditions in Sect. 5.4.

In general the tensor category  $\mathcal{C}^{\mathrm{DHR}}(\mathcal{A})$  will not be rational. Its irreducible objects are given by the unitary representations of an intrinsically determined compact gauge group G, and there is a distinguished graded local extension  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}$  (the Doplicher-Roberts field algebra [10]) with a faithful action of G by automorphisms (global gauge transformations) such that  $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{B}^G$ . Since the index of  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}$  equals the order of the group G, this extension will not be described by a Q-system proper, unless G is finite. One would have to adapt the theory to Q-systems for extensions of infinite index with suitable regularity properties. Let us for the sake of this outlook assume G finite. The distinguished DR extension is maximal in the sense that every irreducible extension is intermediate to  $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{B}$ , and is given by  $\mathcal{B}^H$  with  $H \subset G$  some subgroup of G.

For the braided product of the DR extension  $\mathcal{B}$  with itself,  $\operatorname{Hom}(\Theta, \Theta)$  is isomorphic to the group algebra  $\mathbb{C}G$ . Let us assume for the moment that  $\mathcal{B}$  is local, i.e.,  $\mathcal{A}$  has no fermionic sectors. Then the centre of the braided product  $\mathcal{B} \times \mathcal{B}$  is given by  $\operatorname{Hom}(\Theta, \Theta)$  w.r.t. the \*-product, which is isomorphic to the algebra C(G) of functions on the group, and the minimal projections are the  $\delta$ -functions  $\delta_g \in C(G)$ , cf. [37]. Hence, the boundary conditions are labelled by the elements  $g \in G$ , and the relations between the fields on both sides of the boundary are given by

$$\pi_g(\Psi_{\rho}^2) = \pi_g(\alpha_g(\Psi_{\rho}^1)) = u_{\rho}(g^{-1}) \cdot \pi_g(\Psi_{\rho}^1)$$

with  $u_{\rho}$  being a unitary representation of G acting in the dim( $\rho$ )-dimensional space of charged intertwiners  $H_{\rho} = \operatorname{Hom}(\iota, \iota \rho) \subset \mathcal{B}$ .

Thus, a boundary can be regarded as a vector bundle (with a two-point basis and the charged fields as fibre) in which a boundary condition defines a parallel transport by a gauge transformation. One may now imagine a lattice in Minkowski spacetime with spacelike and timelike edges, and its dual subdivision of spacetime into cells with timelike and spacelike faces as boundaries. The corresponding multiple braided product of field algebras has a huge centre (one copy of C(G) for each edge), and its minimal central projections are gauge configurations on the lattice. We suggest that this is the kinematical arena in which one should place algebraic QFT theory with local gauge symmetry.

Of course, several technical aspects have to be addressed. First, the braided product of extensions must be defined when G is of infinite order, such that the centre becomes C(G). Second, the faces intersect in surfaces of co-dimension 2, thus there will arise boundary conditions of higher order. Third, the case of fermionic sectors has to be included, such as to cover cases like Quantum Electrodynamics where A is to be thought of as the electrically neutral subalgebra of the Maxwell-Dirac algebra. The centre of the braided product of two graded-local extensions will be smaller than C(G); we expect it to be  $C(G/\mathbb{Z}_2)$  where  $\mathbb{Z}_2 \subset G$  is the grading automorphism. Furthermore, a continuum limit has to be devised in which local algebras arise by refining the cells in a given region.

The most important element, however, still missing in our suggestion, is a formulation of the "gauge dynamics", i.e., the dynamics of the gauge field itself and its "minimal coupling" to the gauge covariant fields. In the picture above, the infinite braided product algebra is just a direct sum of algebras, one for each gauge configuration.

Gauge curvature is described in terms of closed paths (plaquettes) in the lattice, which necessarily come along with intersecting faces. It may be speculated that the associated boundary conditions of higher order carry additional degrees of freedom that play a dynamical role. Adding these degrees of freedom should embed the infinite braided product with its huge centre into a larger field algebra that may even be irreducible.

We hope to come to a better understanding of these (presently highly speculative) issues in future work.

#### Acknowledgments

We are very much indebted to J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert for their hospitality and their patience in explaining us their work. R.L. also thanks J. Fröhlich and F. Xu for stimulating motivational comments. M.B. thanks A. Henriques for his hospitality and explaining their approach [1] to defects of conformal nets. We finally thank the referee for a number of critical questions and valuable comments which helped to correct a few errors and led to a clearer exposition of several issues.

# <span id="page-43-5"></span>References

- <span id="page-43-17"></span>[1] A. Bartels, C.L. Douglas, A. Henriques, Conformal nets III: fusion of defects, [\[arXiv:1310.8263v](http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.8263)2].
- <span id="page-43-11"></span>[2] M. Bischoff, Y. Kawahigashi, R. Longo, Characterization of 2D rational local conformal nets and its boundary conditions: the maximal case, Documenta Math. 20 (2015) 1137–1184.
- [3] M. Bischoff, Y. Kawahigashi, R. Longo, K.-H. Rehren: Tensor categories and endomorphisms of von Neumann algebras, SpringerBriefs in Mathematical Physics Vol. 3 (2015); [\[arXiv:1407.4793v](http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.4793)3].
- <span id="page-43-18"></span><span id="page-43-15"></span>[4] H.-J. Borchers, On revolutionizing QFT with modular theory, J. Math. Phys. 41 (2000) 3604–3673.
- <span id="page-43-13"></span>[5] J. B¨ockenhauer, D. Evans, Y. Kawahigashi, On α-induction, chiral generators and modular invariants for subfactors, Commun. Math. Phys. 208, 429–487 (1999).
- <span id="page-43-6"></span>[6] D. Buchholz, G. Mack, I. Todorov, The current algebra on the circle as a germ of local field theories, Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 5B, 20–56 (1988).
- <span id="page-43-8"></span>[7] S. Carpi, Y. Kawahigashi, R. Longo, How to add a boundary condition, Commun. Math. Phys. 322, 149–166 (2013).
- [8] A. Davydov, L. Kong, I. Runkel, Field theories with defects and the centre functor, in: Mathematical foundations of quantum field theory and perturbative string theory, 71–128, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., 83, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2011, [\[arXiv:1107.0495\]](http://arxiv.org/abs/1107.0495).
- <span id="page-43-16"></span><span id="page-43-9"></span>[9] S. Doplicher, R. Haag, J.E. Roberts, Local observables and particle statistics. I, Commun. Math. Phys. 23, 199–230 (1971).
- [10] S. Doplicher, J.E. Roberts, Why there is a field algebra with a compact gauge group describing the superselection structure in particle physics, Commun. Math. Phys. 131, 51–207 (1990).
- <span id="page-43-19"></span><span id="page-43-14"></span>[11] D. Evans, T. Gannon, Near-group fusion categories and their doubles, Adv. in Math. 255, 586–640 (2014).
- <span id="page-43-10"></span>[12] D. Evans, P. Pinto, Subfactor realizations of modular invariants, Commun. Math. Phys. 237, 309–363 (2003).
- <span id="page-43-12"></span>[13] K. Fredenhagen, K.-H. Rehren, B. Schroer, Superselection sectors with braid group statistics and exchange algebras I, Commun. Math. Phys. 125, 201–226 (1989).
- <span id="page-43-2"></span>[14] K. Frieler, K.-H. Rehren, A non-Abelian square root of Abelian vertex operators, J. Math. Phys. 39, 3073–3090 (1998).
- <span id="page-43-7"></span>[15] J. Fr¨ohlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, C. Schweigert, Kramers-Wannier duality from conformal defects, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 070601 (2004).
- <span id="page-43-0"></span>[16] J. Fr¨ohlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, C. Schweigert, Correspondences of ribbon categories, Adv. Math. 199, 192–329 (2006).
- <span id="page-43-3"></span>[17] J. Fr¨ohlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, C. Schweigert, Duality and defects in rational conformal field theory, Nucl. Phys. B 763, 354–430 (2007).
- <span id="page-43-4"></span>[18] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, C. Schweigert, TFT construction of RCFT correlators I: partition functions, Nucl. Phys. B 646 [PM], 353–497 (2002).
- <span id="page-43-1"></span>[19] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, C. Schweigert, TFT construction of RCFT correlators II: unoriented worldsheets, Nucl. Phys. B 678 [PM], 511–637 (2004).
- [20] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, C. Schweigert, Boundaries, defects and Frobenius algebras, Fortschr. Phys. 51, 850–855 (2003).

- <span id="page-44-12"></span><span id="page-44-9"></span>[21] P. Goddard, A. Kent, D. Olive, Unitary representations of the Virasoro and super-Virasoro algebras, Commun. Math. Phys. 103, 105–119 (1986).
- <span id="page-44-11"></span>[22] D. Guido, R. Longo, The conformal spin and statistics theorem, Commun. Math. Phys. 181, 11–35 (1996).
- <span id="page-44-3"></span>[23] M. Izumi, The structure of sectors associated with Longo-Rehren inclusions II. Examples, Rev. Math. Phys. 13, 603–674 (2001).
- <span id="page-44-2"></span>[24] Y. Kawahigashi, R. Longo, M. M¨uger, Multi-interval subfactors and modularity of representations in conformal field theory, Commun. Math. Phys. 219, 631–669 (2001).
- <span id="page-44-15"></span>[25] L. Kong, I. Runkel, Morita classes of algebras in modular tensor categories, Adv. Math. 219, 1548–1576 (2008).
- <span id="page-44-16"></span>[26] H. Kosaki, Extension of Jones' theory on index to arbitrary factors, J. Funct. An. 66, 123–140 (1986).
- <span id="page-44-17"></span>[27] H. Kosaki, R. Longo, A remark on the minimal index of subfactors, J. Funct. An. 107, 458–470 (1992).
- <span id="page-44-4"></span>[28] R. Longo, Index of subfactors and statistics of quantum fields I, Commun. Math. Phys. 126, 217–247 (1989).
- <span id="page-44-19"></span>[29] R. Longo, A duality for Hopf algebras and for subfactors, Commun. Math. Phys. 159, 133– 150 (1994).
- <span id="page-44-7"></span>[30] R. Longo, Conformal subnets and intermediate subfactors, Commun. Math. Phys. 237, 7–30 (2003).
- <span id="page-44-0"></span>[31] R. Longo, K.-H. Rehren, Nets of subfactors, Rev. Math. Phys. 7, 567–597 (1995).
- <span id="page-44-1"></span>[32] R. Longo, K.-H. Rehren, Local fields in boundary CFT, Rev. Math. Phys. 16, 909–960 (2004).
- <span id="page-44-13"></span>[33] R. Longo, K.-H. Rehren, How to remove the boundary in CFT – an operator algebraic procedure, Commun. Math. Phys. 285, 1165–1182 (2009).
- <span id="page-44-14"></span>[34] R. Longo, K.-H. Rehren, Boundary quantum field theory on the interior of the Lorentz hyperboloid, Commun. Math. Phys. 311, 769–785 (2012).
- <span id="page-44-10"></span>[35] R. Longo, J.E. Roberts, A theory of dimension, K-Theory 11, 103–159 (1997).
- <span id="page-44-20"></span>[36] R. Longo, F. Xu, Topological sectors and a dichotomy in conformal field theory, Commun. Math. Phys. 251, 321–364 (2004).
- [37] K.-H. Rehren, Weak C\* Hopf symmetry, in: Quantum Groups Symposium at "Group21", eds. H.-D. Doebner et al., Goslar 1996 Proceedings, Heron Press, Sofia (1997), pp. 62–69, [\[arXiv:q-alg/9611007\]](http://arxiv.org/abs/q-alg/9611007).
- <span id="page-44-8"></span><span id="page-44-6"></span>[38] K.-H. Rehren, Canonical tensor product subfactors, Commun. Math. Phys. 211, 395–406 (2000).
- <span id="page-44-5"></span>[39] A. Schellekens, N. Warner: Conformal subalgebras of Kac-Moody algebras, Phys. Rev. D 34, 3092–3096 (1986).
- <span id="page-44-18"></span>[40] B. Schroer, T.T. Truong, The order/disorder quantum field operators associated with the two-dimensional Ising model in the continuum limit, Nucl. Phys. B 144, 80–122 (1978).
- [41] F. Xu, Jones-Wassermann subfactors for disconnected intervals, Commun. Contemp. Math. 2, 307–347 (2000).