#### Fractional Quantum Anomalous Hall Effect in Multilayer Graphene

Zhengguang Lu<sup>1</sup>†, Tonghang Han<sup>1</sup>†, Yuxuan Yao<sup>1</sup>†, Aidan P. Reddy<sup>1</sup>, Jixiang Yang<sup>1</sup>, Junseok Seo<sup>1</sup>, Kenji Watanabe<sup>2</sup>, Takashi Taniguchi<sup>3</sup>, Liang Fu<sup>1</sup>, Long Ju<sup>1</sup>\*

The fractional quantum anomalous Hall effect (FQAHE), the analog of the fractional quantum Hall effect<sup>1</sup> at zero magnetic field, is predicted to exist in topological flat bands under spontaneous timereversal-symmetry breaking<sup>2-6</sup>. The demonstration of FQAHE could lead to non-Abelian anyons which form the basis of topological quantum computation<sup>7-9</sup>. So far, FOAHE has been observed only in twisted MoTe<sub>2</sub> (t-MoTe<sub>2</sub>) at moiré filling factor  $v > 1/2^{10-13}$ . Graphene-based moiré superlattices are believed to host FOAHE with the potential advantage of superior material quality and higher electron mobility. Here we report the observation of integer and fractional QAH effects in a rhombohedral pentalayer graphene/hBN moiré superlattice. At zero magnetic field, we observed plateaus of quantized Hall resistance  $R_{xy} = \frac{h}{ve^2}$  at filling factors v = 1, 2/3, 3/5, 4/7, 4/9, 3/7 and 2/5 of the moiré superlattice respectively. These features are accompanied by clear dips in the longitudinal resistance  $R_{xx}$ . In addition, at zero magnetic field,  $R_{xy}$  equals  $\frac{2h}{a^2}$  at v = 1/2 and varies linearly with the filling factor—similar to the composite Fermi liquid (CFL) in the half-filled lowest Landau level at high magnetic fields  $^{14-17}$ . By tuning the gate displacement field D and v, we observed phase transitions from CFL and FQAH states to other correlated electron states. Our graphene system provides an ideal platform for exploring charge fractionalization and (non-Abelian) anyonic braiding at zero magnetic field<sup>7-9,18-20</sup> especially considering a lateral junction between FQAHE and superconducting regions in the same device $^{21-23}$ .

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>1</sup>Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>2</sup>Research Center for Electronic and Optical Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>3</sup>Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan

<sup>\*</sup>Corresponding author. Email: longiu@mit.edu †These authors contributed equally to this work.

The fractional quantum Hall effect observed in conventional two-dimensional electron gas (2DEGs) at the semiconductor interface is a classic example of intertwined electron correlation and topology effects in condensed matter physics1 . It has been proposed that similar exotic states could exist at zero magnetic field, by engineering flat electronic bands with non-zero Chern numbers 2–6 . As a precursor of FQAHE, the integer quantum anomalous Hall effect (IQAHE) has been conceived24 and realized in magnetic topologic insulators and the moiré superlattice made of two-dimensional materials25–29. Recently, FQAHE has been proposed in twisted transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) moiré superlattices30–34 and observed in twisted MoTe2 at filling factors *v* > 1/210–13. Graphene-based moiré superlattices have also been proposed to host FQAH states35–40, and could potentially show a plethora of fractional states due to the fewer defects in graphene lattice than in TMD lattices. Although fractional Chern insulators have been observed in graphene-based moiré superlattices at high magnetic fields41,42, observation of FQAHE in any graphene system has not been reported to date.

The moiré superlattice formed between rhombohedral graphene (RG) and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has been demonstrated to be a remarkable platform for emergent quantum phenomena. In the highly tunable electronic bands in crystalline multilayer RG43–46, correlated insulators, superconductivity, Chern insulators, orbital magnetism and multiferroicity have been demonstrated43,46–53. When placed on hBN to form a moiré superlattice, RG exhibits Mott insulators, tunable ferromagnetism and Chern insulators, as well as superconductivity29,54–56. Based on a tight-binding calculation, the band dispersion at zero gatedisplacement field *D* becomes flatter as the layer number increases from *N* = 2 to 5, while the valence band starts to suffer from increased trigonal warping with *N* > 557. At non-zero *Ds*, states near the band edge acquire larger Berry curvatures57,58 that enable the formation of topological flat band when a moiré potential from hBN is introduced38,59. Therefore, engineering topological flat bands in gate-tuned multilayer RG/hBN is a promising approach for realizing FQAHE. From an experimental point of view, the RG/hBN moiré superlattice features three advantages over twisted TMD moiré superlattices: 1. the higher material quality of graphene over TMD; 2. better electrical contact to graphene than to TMD; 3. the twist-angle inhomogeneity induces less variations of the moiré period in a hetero-bilayer moiré than in a homo-bilayer moiré. While the Chern insulator state has been observed in trilayer RG/hBN at integer moiré fillings29,49, FQAHE has not been found in this system so far.

Here we report observations of IQAHE and FQAHEs in a new graphene moiré system formed by pentalayer RG and hBN, as shown in Fig. 1a. While the general possibility of FQAHE in RG/hBN moiré superlattices has been suggested before38, the pentalayer system we study has not received any concrete theoretical analysis or predictions. The superlattice period is ~11.5 nm and the twist angle is ~0.77°. We observed quantized Hall resistance *Rxy* = ± ! #! at a moiré superlattice filling factor *<sup>v</sup>* = 1 and zero magnetic field. These states correspond to Chern numbers *C* = ±1. At fractional filling factors between 0 and 1, we observed 6 states with fractionally quantized Hall resistances *Rxy* = ! '#!at zero magnetic field. We observed *Rxy =* (! #! at *<sup>v</sup>* = 1/2 and a linear dependence of *Rxy* on *v*. By tuning *D*, we observed phase transitions from composite Fermi liquid (CFL) to valley-polarized Fermi liquid and a correlated insulator. We have measured two devices with similar moiré superlattice periods and they both show IQAHE and FQAHE. The data presented in the main text is based on Device 1, while the data from Device 2 is included in Extended Data Figures 8&9.

# **Phase Diagram of the Moiré Superlattice**

Figure 1b&c show the longitudinal resistance *Rxx* and transverse resistance *Rxy* as functions of charge density *ne* (filling factor *v*) and *D* measured at temperature *T* = 10 mK. *Rxx* and *Rxy* have been symmetrized and antisymmetrized using data collected at *B* = ±0.1 T (see Methods and Extended Data Figure 4). While most regions on the maps show small *Rxx* and *Rxy*, large values of resistances emerge in a tilted stripe region. At small *v* up to 1/2, large *Rxx* emerges, while *Rxy* shows large fluctuations around zero. At *v* = 2/5 to 1, large *Rxy* emerges and gradually changes with *v*. At *v* = 1, 2/3, 3/5, and 2/5, *Rxx* shows local minimums while *Rxy* shows plateaus as a function of *v*. As we show in the following sections, these states feature quantized *Rxy*  as expected for IQAHE and FQAHEs. We note that the charge density corresponding to *v* = 1 in our system is about 5 times smaller than that in t-MoTe2 10–13, due to the larger moiré superlattice period.

The insulating state with large *Rxx* we observed at *v* ≤ 1/2 occupies a large continuous range of filling factor, which is distinct from correlated insulators at integer filling factors or generalized Wigner crystals at discrete fractional filling factors of moiré superlattices60,61. It is possible, for example, that electron crystallization happens within the flat moiré conduction band and leads to a Wigner crystal state at zero magnetic field62. At *D < 0,* we observed correlated insulating states at integer filling factors *v* = 2, 3 and 4 (see Extended Data Figure 1). The existence of topological states and correlated insulating states at opposite *Ds* are consistent with previous experiments on RG/hBN moiré superlattices29,49,54. In this work, we focus on the regime of large positive displacement fields.

In the tilted stripe region, the large anomalous Hall signals indicates spontaneous valley polarization that breaks the time-reversal symmetry. As the *D* required to observe the anomalous Hall signal is quite high, at finite charge density, the re-distribution of charges is expected to partially screen the externally applied *D*. This picture may explain the slope of the striped region, in which a larger *D* is needed to maintain a narrow bandwidth as *v* increases. The observation of IQAHE and FQAHEs at *v* <= 1 further suggests the presence of a topological flat band.

Fig 1d shows a moiré band structure calculated from a tight-binding model for pentalayer RG59, with an added phenomenological superlattice potential to account for moiré effects from the nearly aligned hBN layer. For a top-to-bottom interlayer potential difference <sup>D</sup> = 75 meV, this model produces a |*C*|=1 lowest conduction moiré band that is extremely narrow (bandwidth < 5 meV) and isolated from other bands with a global band gap. In contrast, the lowest valence moiré band is significantly broader (bandwidth > 45 meV), topologically trivial (*C* = 0), and energetically overlapping with adjacent moiré bands.

*Fig. 1. Device configuration, topological flat band and phase diagram of the rhombohedral pentalayer graphene/hBN moiré superlattice. a. Schematic of the device configuration, showing a moiré superlattice between the top layer of graphene and the top hBN, with a moiré period of 11.5 nm. b-c. Phase diagrams of the device revealed by symmetrized Rxx and anti-symmetrized Rxy at B = ± 0.1 T as functions of ne (v) and D. The temperature at the mixing chamber of dilution refrigerator is 10 mK. Large anomalous Hall signals emerge in a tilted stripe region centered at D/*<sup>e</sup>*<sup>0</sup> ~ 0.93 V/nm. Clear dips of Rxx can be seen at filling factors of the moiré superlattice v = 1, 2/3, 3/5 and 2/5 (indicated by the dashed lines and arrows), where Rxy shows plateaus of values. d. Calculated band structure of our moiré superlattice with interlayer potential* <sup>D</sup> *= 75 meV, showing a flat |C|=1 moiré conduction band and a dispersive C=0 moiré valence band.*

## **Integer Quantum Anomalous Hall Effect**

Figure 2 shows detailed characterizations of the anomalous Hall state at *v* = 1. At *D/*<sup>e</sup>*<sup>0</sup>* = 0.97 V/nm, both *Rxy* and *Rxx* exhibit hysteretic behaviors under scanned magnetic field, as shown in Fig. 2a&b. At *T* = 0.1 K, *Rxy* is quantized at ! #! at zero magnetic field, while *Rxx* is smaller than 5 *Ω. Rxy* remains quantized up to at least 1.6 K and *Rxx* remains small in the same temperature range. Figure 2c&d show the *B*-dependence of *Rxy* and *Rxx* in the vicinity of *v* = 1 at *D/*<sup>e</sup>*<sup>0</sup>* = 0.97 V/nm. The anomalous Hall state persists to *B* = 0 T and exhibits a wide plateau in both *Rxy* and *Rxx*. The dispersion of this state agrees well with a Chern number *C* = ±1 state (indicated by the dashed line) according to the Streda's formula. Starting from ~0.6 T, more dips in *Rxx* emerge and their slopes with *B* agree with *C* = 2 and 3 states (indicated by additional dashed lines). Figure 2e shows the *ne* (*v*) dependence of *Rxy* and *Rxx* and features a plateau of width D*ne* ~ 3\*1010 cm-2 . The quantized *Rxy* and small *Rxx* values of the state at *v* = 1 exist in a wide range of *D*, as shown in Fig. 2f. At both higher and lower *D*s, the device shows small *Rxx* and *Rxy*, except for a peak of *Rxx* during both transitions.

These observations indicate the IQAHE with *C* = ±1 at filling factor *v* = 1. The features corresponding to *C* = 2 and 3 are due to integer quantum Hall effects that emerge at a low magnetic field, which demonstrates the high electron mobility of our device. The incremental change D*C =* 1 between these three features indicates that the isospin degeneracy is completely lifted at *v* = 1, which corresponds to one electron per moiré unit cell. The width of the IQAHE plateau corresponds to a ~10 times smaller charge density than that in t-MoTe2 11,13.

Fig. 2. Integer quantum anomalous Hall effect. a & b. Magnetic hysteresis scans of  $R_{xy}$  and  $R_{xx}$  at v=1 and  $D/\varepsilon_0=0.97$  V/nm and T=0.1 - 4 K. Solid (dashed) lines correspond to scanning B from positive (negative) values to negative (positive) values. At 0.1 K,  $R_{xy}$  is quantized at  $\pm \frac{h}{e^2}$  which corresponds to a Chern number  $C=\pm 1$ , while  $R_{xx}$  shows a value  $< 5 \Omega$  at B=0 mT. c-d. Landau-fan diagrams of  $R_{xx}$  and  $R_{xy}$  at  $D/\varepsilon_0=0.97$  V/nm. The IQAH state can be seen as a wide plateau in both maps, which disperses with magnetic field with a slope that agrees well with the dashed lines (corresponding to  $C=\pm 1$ , as determined by the Streda's formula). At above  $\sim 0.6$  T, features associated with integer quantum Hall states start to appear, corresponding to  $C=\pm 2$  and 3 correspondingly as indicated by additional dashed lines. e. Symmetrized  $R_{xx}$  and anti-symmetrized  $R_{xy}$  (we present the positive values for convenience) as functions of v at v and v and v and v and v be a function of v at v and v and v and v be a function of v at v and v and v be a function of v at v and v and v and v be a function of v at v and v and v and v and v be a function of v at v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v and v

#### **Fractional Quantum Anomalous Hall Effects**

As shown by Fig. 1b&c, large anomalous Hall response is found in a wide range between v = 2/5 and 1. Figure 3a&b show finer maps of  $R_{xx}$  and  $R_{xy}$  in this range, where additional vertical line features can be seen. To better visualize the states corresponding to these lines, we present in Fig. 3c line-cuts along the dashed lines in Fig. 3a&b. We can observe plateaus of  $R_{xy}$  at v = 2/5, 3/7, 4/9, 4/7, 3/5 and 2/3 with the value of  $R_{xy}$  quantized at  $\frac{h}{ve^2}$ . At the same time,  $R_{xx}$  shows clear dips at these filling factors, similar to the observations of fractional quantum Hall states in 2DEGs at high magnetic fields<sup>1,14</sup>. We note that the v =2/5 state is right next to the boundary of the anomalous Hall region, which shows a peak in  $R_{xx}$ . Nevertheless, the clear plateau of  $R_{xy}$  and dip in  $R_{xx}$  are observed at v = 2/5. Figure 3d-f & h-j show the magnetic hysteresis scans at fractional filling factors corresponding to the states identified in Fig. 3c. For all these states,  $R_{xy}$ shows quantized values of  $\frac{h}{ve^2}$  while  $R_{xx}$  is much smaller than  $R_{xy}$ . Lastly, Fig. 3g&k shows the Landau-fan diagram of  $R_{xx}$  in the range of v < 1/2 and v > 1/2, respectively. The dips at fractional filling factors evolve into tilted lines whose slopes agree well with the dashed lines, which are calculated based on the Streda's formula  $\frac{\partial n_e}{\partial R} = \frac{ve}{h}$  for the corresponding filling factors. As a function of D, all FQAH states develops a plateau of  $R_{xy}$  at the corresponding quantized values (see Extended Data Figure 2) and dips of  $R_{xx}$ . The center of the  $R_{xy}$  plateau and the dips in  $R_{xx}$  shift to higher D as the filling factor increases, which agrees with the tilted stripe shape of the anomalous Hall region as shown in Fig. 1b&c.

The observations of quantized  $R_{xy}$  and the corresponding dips in  $R_{xx}$  at fractional filling factors, together with the hysteresis enclosing zero magnetic field indicate FQAH states in our graphene-based moiré superlattice. These states resemble the Jain sequence of fractional quantum Hall states<sup>14–17</sup>, but at zero magnetic field. Compared with t-MoTe<sub>2</sub> where FQAHEs are only observed at  $v > 1/2^{10-13}$ , the fractional states we observed reside at both sides of the half-filling. This is likely due to the better electrical contact in graphene devices than that has been achieved in semiconductor devices at low charge densities. The narrowest plateau width of FQAH states we have observed is ~10<sup>10</sup> cm<sup>-2</sup>, which is about 10 times narrower than the 3/5 state observed in t-MoTe<sub>2</sub><sup>11</sup>.

Fig. 3. Fractional quantum anomalous Hall effects. a & b. Zoomed-in diagrams of symmetrized  $R_{xx}$  and anti-symmetrized  $R_{xy}$  (we present the positive values for convenience) at  $B=\pm 0.1$  T as functions of v ( $n_e$ ) and D. Fine features that could not be identified in Fig. 1d&e can be seen in the vicinity of v=1/2, especially in the  $R_{xx}$  diagram. Data is collected using a constant voltage bias measurement. c.  $R_{xx}$  and  $R_{xy}$  along the dashed lines in a & b, taken with a constant current measurement. Clear plateaus of  $R_{xy}$  at  $\frac{5h}{2e^2}$ ,  $\frac{7h}{3e^2}$ ,  $\frac{9h}{4e^2}$ ,  $\frac{7h}{4e^2}$ ,  $\frac{5h}{3e^2}$  and  $\frac{3h}{2e^2}$  emerge at v=2/5, 3/7, 4/9, 4/7, 3/5 and 2/3, as indicated by the dashed lines and

*arrows. Rxx shows clear dips at the corresponding filling factors. d-f & h-j. Magnetic hysteresis scans of Rxy and Rxx at v = 2/5, 3/7, 4/9, 4/7, 3/5 and 2/3, showing quantized values of Rxy =*  ! '#! *and much smaller Rxx. g&k. Landau-fan diagram of Rxx at D/*<sup>e</sup>*<sup>0</sup> = 0.92 V/nm. The FQAH states can be seen as tilted line features, the slopes of which agree well with the dashed lines. The slopes of dashed lines correspond to C = 2/5, 3/7 and 4/9 in g, and 4/7, 3/5 and 2/3 in k using the Streda's formula.*

## **AHE and Phase Transitions at Hall-filling**

In addition to FQAHE states that have plateaus in *Rxy* and dips in *Rxx*, we observed a continuously changing anomalous Hall resistance in a wide range of filling factors from 4/9 to 4/7. Especially at around *v* = 1/2, *Rxy* varies roughly linearly with *ne* and *v* while *Rxx* does not show any clear dips, as shown in Fig. 4a. At *v* = 1/2, *Rxy* equals (! #! . Fig. 4b shows the hysteretic behaviors of *Rxy* and *Rxx* under a sweeping magnetic field. Figure 4c shows the *D*-dependence of *Rxy* and *Rxx* at fixed filling factor *v* = 1/2. The value of *Rxy* spans in a plateau which is concurrent with small values of *Rxx*. At higher *D*, *Rxy* decreases monotonically while *Rxx*  first increases and then decreases. At lower *D*, *Rxx* shoots up and *Rxy* shows large fluctuations in the range of 0.85 to 0.9 V/nm. At even lower *D*, *Rxy* becomes almost zero while *Rxx* remains at a few kW. At higher *D*  than that of the *Rxy* = (! #! plateau, *Rxy* decreases monotonically while *Rxx* first increases and then decreases. As shown in Fig. 4d, the state at *D/*<sup>e</sup>*<sup>0</sup>* = 0.97 V/nm features small values of *Rxy* and *Rxx*, but a decent value of the Hall angle 1~9.5° corresponding to tan1 <sup>=</sup> 2\$% 2\$\$ ~0.17.

The absence of a dip in *Rxx* at *v* = 1/2 and the linear dependence of *Rxy* with *v* in the neighborhood are distinct from FQAH states we described in the previous section and suggest the absence of a charge gap11,63,64. These latter properties are reminiscent of the CFL in the half-filled lowest Landau level of 2DEGs at high magnetic fields14–17. Starting from the zero-magnetic-field CFL state, our data suggests two distinct types of phase transitions driven by *D*. At the higher *D* side of the CFL state, the system is in a valleypolarized metallic state49,51–53, due to the non-zero anomalous Hall resistance and small *Rxx*. The persistence of valley polarization and the peak of *Rxx* at intermediate *D*s suggest that it is a continuous phase transition from CFL to Fermi liquid (FL). This new type of phase transition has been recently proposed by theory in FQAHE systems but was not observed in t-MoTe2 65,66. At the lower *D* side, we have a phase transition from CFL to our observed correlated insulator at *v* ≤ 1/2. Our observations call for further experiments to explore both types of phase transition, which are beyond the scope of this work.

*Fig. 4. Anomalous Hall effect and phase transitions at half-filling. a. Symmetrized Rxx and antisymmetrized Rxy (we present the positive values for convenience) at B = ± 0.1 T and D/*<sup>e</sup>*0= 0.93 V/nm in the neighborhood of half-filling. Rxy shows a value of* (! #! *at v = 1/2 and varies roughly linearly with the change of filling factor, while no dip in Rxx is observed. These observations resemble the signatures of composite Fermi liquid (CFL) in 2DEGs at high magnetic fields. b. Magnetic hysteresis scans of Rxy and Rxx at v = 1/2, showing Rxy plateaus at ±*(! #! *and much smaller Rxx. c. Rxy and Rxx at v = 1/2 as functions of D, showing the same Rxy value in a plateau spanning from 0.9 to 0.94 V/nm. At higher D, both Rxy and Rxx decrease to close to zero. At lower D, Rxx shoots up while Rxy shows large fluctuations at around zero. d. Magnetic hysteresis scans of Rxy and Rxx at v = 1/2 and D/*<sup>e</sup>*0= 0.97 V/nm, showing anomalous Hall signals and a Hall angle* 1~9.5°*, corresponding to* 1 <sup>=</sup> 2\$% 2\$\$ ~0.17*. This indicates a phase transition from CFL to valley-polarized metal at the higher D side. At the lower D side, the phase transition happens between CFL and a correlated insulating state.*

# **Conclusion and Outlook**

We observed IQHAE at *v* = 1 and FQAHEs at both sides of half-filling of the first moiré conduction band. Beyond the specific moiré superlattice demonstrated here, our results indicate the great potential of similar

RG/hBN systems with varied layer number, gate displacement field and twist angle for FQAHE studies an opportunity that has been largely overlooked by theory and experiment so far. Given the high material quality, additional opportunities of researching novel quantum phase transitions, electron crystals at zero magnetic field, and behaviors of CFL in the moiré potential are within the reach of experiments63,64. The possibility of high-Chern-number flat bands in RG51 also points to possibly more exotic FQAH states with non-Abelian anyons for topological quantum computation7–9 . Furthermore, the co-existence of FQAHE and superconductivity50,56 in graphene systems facilitates the realization of synthetic non-Abelian anyonic braiding by using a lateral junction within the same device21–23.

## **References**

- 1. Tsui, D. C., Stormer, H. L. & Gossard, A. C. Two-dimensional magnetotransport in the extreme quantum limit. *Phys Rev Lett* **48**, 1559–1562 (1982).
- 2. Neupert, T., Santos, L., Chamon, C. & Mudry, C. Fractional quantum Hall states at zero magnetic field. *Phys. Rev. Lett.* **106**, 236804 (2011).
- 3. Tang, E., Mei, J. W. & Wen, X. G. High-temperature fractional quantum Hall states. *Phys. Rev. Lett.* **106**, 236802 (2011).
- 4. N Regnault, B. B. Fractional Chern insulator. *Phys. Rev. X* **1**, 021014 (2011).
- 5. Sheng, D. N., Gu, Z. C., Sun, K. & Sheng, L. Fractional quantum Hall effect in the absence of Landau levels. *Nat. Commun.* **2**, (2011).
- 6. Sun, K., Gu, Z., Katsura, H. & Das Sarma, S. Nearly flatbands with nontrivial topology. *Phys Rev Lett* **106**, 236803 (2011).
- 7. Moore, G. & Read, N. Nonabelions in the fractional quantum hall effect. *Nucl Phys B* **360**, 362– 396 (1991).
- 8. Wen, X. G. Non-Abelian statistics in the fractional quantum Hall states. *Phys Rev Lett* **66**, 802 (1991).
- 9. Nayak, C., Simon, S. H., Stern, A., Freedman, M. & Das Sarma, S. Non-Abelian anyons and topological quantum computation. *Rev Mod Phys* **80**, 1083–1159 (2008).
- 10. Cai, J. *et al.* Signatures of Fractional Quantum Anomalous Hall States in Twisted MoTe2. *Nature 2023* 1–3 (2023) doi:10.1038/s41586-023-06289-w.
- 11. Park, H. *et al.* Observation of Fractionally Quantized Anomalous Hall Effect. *Nature* (2023) doi:10.1038/S41586-023-06536-0.
- 12. Zeng, Y. *et al.* Thermodynamic evidence of fractional Chern insulator in moiré MoTe2. *Nature* (2023) doi:10.1038/S41586-023-06452-3.

- 13. Xu, F. *et al.* Observation of Integer and Fractional Quantum Anomalous Hall Effects in Twisted Bilayer MoTe2. *Phys Rev X* **13**, 031037 (2023).
- 14. Willett, R. *et al.* Observation of an even-denominator quantum number in the fractional quantum Hall effect. *Phys Rev Lett* **59**, 1776 (1987).
- 15. Jain, J. K. Composite-fermion approach for the fractional quantum Hall effect. *Phys Rev Lett* **63**, 199 (1989).
- 16. Halperin, B. I., Lee, P. A. & Read, N. Theory of the half-filled Landau level. *Phys Rev B* **47**, 7312 (1993).
- 17. Willett, R. L., Ruel, R. R., West, K. W. & Pfeiffer, L. N. Experimental demonstration of a Fermi surface at one-half filling of the lowest Landau level. *Phys Rev Lett* **71**, 3846 (1993).
- 18. Nakamura, J., Liang, S., Gardner, G. C. & Manfra, M. J. Direct observation of anyonic braiding statistics. *Nature Physics 2020 16:9* **16**, 931–936 (2020).
- 19. Bartolomei, H. *et al.* Fractional statistics in anyon collisions. *Science* **368**, 173–177 (2020).
- 20. Kundu, H. K., Biswas, S., Ofek, N., Umansky, V. & Heiblum, M. Anyonic interference and braiding phase in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. *Nat Phys* **19**, 515–521 (2023).
- 21. Lindner, N. H., Berg, E., Refael, G. & Stern, A. Fractionalizing majorana fermions: Non-abelian statistics on the edges of abelian quantum hall states. *Phys Rev X* **2**, 041002 (2012).
- 22. Clarke, D. J., Alicea, J. & Shtengel, K. Exotic non-Abelian anyons from conventional fractional quantum Hall states. *Nature Communications 2013 4:1* **4**, 1–9 (2013).
- 23. Vaezi, A. Fractional topological superconductor with fractionalized Majorana fermions. *Phys Rev B Condens Matter Mater Phys* **87**, 035132 (2013).
- 24. Haldane, F. D. M. Model for a quantum Hall effect without Landau levels: condensed-matter realization of the "parity anomaly". *Phys. Rev. Lett.* **61**, 2015–2018 (1988).
- 25. Chang, C. Z. *et al.* Experimental observation of the quantum anomalous Hall effect in a magnetic topological insulator. *Science* **340**, 167–170 (2013).
- 26. Deng, Y. *et al.* Quantum anomalous Hall effect in intrinsic magnetic topological insulator. *Science*  **367**, 895–900 (2020).
- 27. Serlin, M. *et al.* Intrinsic quantized anomalous Hall effect in a moiré heterostructure. *Science* **367**, 900–903 (2020).
- 28. Li, T. *et al.* Quantum anomalous Hall effect from intertwined moiré bands. *Nature* **600**, 641–646 (2021).
- 29. Chen, G. *et al.* Tunable correlated Chern insulator and ferromagnetism in a moiré superlattice. *Nature* **579**, 56–61 (2020).
- 30. Wu, F., Lovorn, T., Tutuc, E., Martin, I. & Macdonald, A. H. Topological Insulators in Twisted Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Homobilayers. *Phys Rev Lett* **122**, 086402 (2019).

- 31. Li, H., Kumar, U., Sun, K. & Lin, S. Z. Spontaneous fractional Chern insulators in transition metal dichalcogenide moiré superlattices. *Phys Rev Res* **3**, L032070 (2021).
- 32. Devakul, T., Crépel, V., Zhang, Y. & Fu, L. Magic in twisted transition metal dichalcogenide bilayers. *Nature Communications 2021 12:1* **12**, 1–9 (2021).
- 33. Yu, H., Chen, M. & Yao, W. Giant magnetic field from moiré induced Berry phase in homobilayer semiconductors. *Natl Sci Rev* **7**, 12–20 (2020).
- 34. Crépel, V. & Fu, L. Anomalous Hall metal and fractional Chern insulator in twisted transition metal dichalcogenides. *Phys Rev B* **107**, L201109 (2023).
- 35. Ledwith, P. J., Tarnopolsky, G., Khalaf, E. & Vishwanath, A. Fractional Chern insulator states in twisted bilayer graphene: An analytical approach. *Phys Rev Res* **2**, 023237 (2020).
- 36. Abouelkomsan, A., Liu, Z. & Bergholtz, E. J. Particle-Hole Duality, Emergent Fermi Liquids, and Fractional Chern Insulators in Moiré Flatbands. *Phys Rev Lett* **124**, 106803 (2020).
- 37. Devakul, T. *et al.* Magic-angle helical trilayer graphene. *Sci Adv* (2023).
- 38. Zhang, Y. H., Mao, D., Cao, Y., Jarillo-Herrero, P. & Senthil, T. Nearly flat Chern bands in moiré superlattices. *Phys Rev B* **99**, 075127 (2019).
- 39. Gao, Q., Dong, J., Ledwith, P., Parker, D. & Khalaf, E. Untwisting Moiré Physics: Almost Ideal Bands and Fractional Chern Insulators in Periodically Strained Monolayer Graphene. *Phys Rev Lett* **131**, 096401 (2023).
- 40. Repellin, C. & Senthil, T. Chern bands of twisted bilayer graphene: Fractional Chern insulators and spin phase transition. *Phys Rev Res* **2**, (2020).
- 41. Spanton, E. M. *et al.* Observation of fractional Chern insulators in a van der Waals heterostructure. *Science* **360**, 62–66 (2018).
- 42. Xie, Y. *et al.* Fractional Chern insulators in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene. *Nature 2021 600:7889* **600**, 439–443 (2021).
- 43. Bao, W. *et al.* Stacking-dependent band gap and quantum transport in trilayer graphene. *Nat. Phys.* **7**, 948–952 (2011).
- 44. Zhang, L., Zhang, Y., Camacho, J., Khodas, M. & Zaliznyak, I. The experimental observation of quantum Hall effect of l=3 chiral quasiparticles in trilayer graphene. *Nature Physics 2011 7:12* **7**, 953–957 (2011).
- 45. Zou, K., Zhang, F., Clapp, C., MacDonald, A. H. & Zhu, J. Transport studies of dual-gated ABC and ABA trilayer graphene: Band gap opening and band structure tuning in very large perpendicular electric fields. *Nano Lett* **13**, 369–373 (2013).
- 46. Lee, Y. *et al.* Competition between spontaneous symmetry breaking and single-particle gaps in trilayer graphene. *Nat. Commun.* **5**, (2014).

- 47. Myhro, K. *et al.* Large tunable intrinsic gap in rhombohedral-stacked tetralayer graphene at half filling. *2d Mater* **5**, 045013 (2018).
- 48. Shi, Y. *et al.* Electronic phase separation in multilayer rhombohedral graphite. *Nature 2020 584:7820* **584**, 210–214 (2020).
- 49. Zhou, H. *et al.* Half- and quarter-metals in rhombohedral trilayer graphene. *Nature 2021 598:7881* **598**, 429–433 (2021).
- 50. Zhou, H., Xie, T., Taniguchi, T., Watanabe, K. & Young, A. F. Superconductivity in rhombohedral trilayer graphene. *Nature 2021 598:7881* **598**, 434–438 (2021).
- 51. Han, T. *et al.* Correlated Insulator and Chern Insulators in Pentalayer Rhombohedral Stacked Graphene. *Nat. Nanotechnology* (2023).
- 52. Han, T. *et al.* Orbital Multiferroicity in Pentalayer Rhombohedral Graphene. *Nature* (2023).
- 53. Liu, K. *et al.* Interaction-driven spontaneous broken-symmetry insulator and metals in ABCA tetralayer graphene. *arXiv:2306.11042* **6**, 11042 (2023).
- 54. Chen, G. *et al.* Evidence of a gate-tunable Mott insulator in a trilayer graphene moiré superlattice. *Nature Physics 2019 15:3* **15**, 237–241 (2019).
- 55. Chen, G. *et al.* Tunable Orbital Ferromagnetism at Noninteger Filling of a Moiré Superlattice. *Nano Lett* **22**, 238–245 (2022).
- 56. Chen, G. *et al.* Signatures of tunable superconductivity in a trilayer graphene moiré superlattice. *Nature* **572**, 215–219 (2019).
- 57. Koshino, M. & McCann, E. Trigonal warping and Berry's phase Nπ in ABC-stacked multilayer graphene. *Phys. Rev. B* **80**, 165409 (2009).
- 58. Zhang, F., Jung, J., Fiete, G. A., Niu, Q. & MacDonald, A. H. Spontaneous quantum Hall states in chirally stacked few-layer graphene systems. *Phys. Rev. Lett.* **106**, 156801 (2011).
- 59. Park, Y., Kim, Y., Chittari, B. L. & Jung, J. Topological flat bands in rhombohedral tetralayer and multilayer graphene on hexagonal boron nitride moire superlattices. *arXiv: 2304.12874* (2023).
- 60. Regan, E. C. *et al.* Mott and generalized Wigner crystal states in WSe2/WS2 moiré superlattices. *Nature 2020 579:7799* **579**, 359–363 (2020).
- 61. Xu, Y. *et al.* Correlated insulating states at fractional fillings of moiré superlattices. *Nature 2020 587:7833* **587**, 214–218 (2020).
- 62. Smoleński, T. *et al.* Signatures of Wigner crystal of electrons in a monolayer semiconductor. *Nature 2021 595:7865* **595**, 53–57 (2021).
- 63. Goldman, H., Reddy, A. P., Paul, N. & Fu, L. Zero-Field Composite Fermi Liquid in Twisted Semiconductor Bilayers. *Phys Rev Lett* **131**, 136501 (2023).
- 64. Dong, J., Wang, J., Ledwith, P. J., Vishwanath, A. & Parker, D. E. Composite Fermi Liquid at Zero Magnetic Field in Twisted MoTe2. *Phys Rev Lett* **131**, 136502 (2023).

- 65. Barkeshli, M. & McGreevy, J. Continuous transitions between composite Fermi liquid and Landau Fermi liquid: A route to fractionalized Mott insulators. *Phys Rev B Condens Matter Mater Phys* **86**, 075136 (2012).
- 66. Song, X.-Y., Zhang, Y.-H. & Senthil, T. Phase transitions out of quantum Hall states in moir\'e TMD bilayers. *arXiv: 2308.10903* (2023).

**Data availability** The data shown in the main figures and other data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.

# **Acknowledgments**

We acknowledge helpful discussions with X.G. Wen, T. Senthil, P. Lee, F. Wang and R. Ashoori. We thank D. Laroche for assistance with early investigation of a related sample. L.J. acknowledges support from a Sloan Fellowship. Work by T.H., J.Y. and J.S. was supported by NSF grant no. DMR- 2225925. The device fabrication of this work was supported by the STC Center for Integrated Quantum Materials, NSF grant no. DMR-1231319 and was carried out at the Harvard Center for Nanoscale Systems and MIT.Nano. Part of the device fabrication was supported by USD(R&E) under contract no. FA8702-15-D-0001. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Numbers 20H00354, 21H05233 and 23H02052) and World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI), MEXT, Japan. L.F. was supported by the STC Center for Integrated Quantum Materials (CIQM) under NSF award no. DMR-1231319.

# **Author Contributions**

L.J. supervised the project. Z.L. and T.H. performed the DC magneto-transport measurement. T.H. and Y.Y. fabricated the devices. J.Y., J.S., Z.L. and T.H. helped with installing and testing the dilution refrigerator. A.R. and L.F. performed the calculations. K.W. and T.T. grew hBN crystals. All authors discussed the results and wrote the paper.