# Robust non-Abelian even-denominator fractional Chern insulator in twisted bilayer MoTe<sup>2</sup>

Feng Chen,<sup>1</sup> Wei-Wei Luo,2, 3 Wei Zhu,3, [∗](#page-14-0) and D. N. Sheng1, [†](#page-15-0)

<sup>1</sup>*Department of Physics and Astronomy, California State University Northridge, Northridge, California 91330, USA Zhejiang Institute of Photoelectronics & Zhejiang Institute for Advanced Light Source, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, Zhejiang 321004, China* 3 *School of Science, Westlake University, Hangzhou 310024, China, and Institute of Natural Sciences, Westlake Institute of Advanced Study, Hangzhou 310024, China*

# ABSTRACT

A recent experiment observes a series of quantum spin Hall effects in transition metal dichalcogenide moire´ MoTe<sup>2</sup> [K. Kang, *et. al*, Nature 628, 522-526 (2024)]. Among them, the vanishing Hall signal at the filling factor ν = 3 implies a possible realization of a time-reversal pair of the even-denominator fractional Chern insulators (FCIs). Inspired by this discovery, we investigate whether a robust incompressible quantum Hall liquid can be stabilized in the half-filled Chern band of twisted MoTe<sup>2</sup> bilayers. We use the continuum model with parameters relevant to twisted MoTe<sup>2</sup> bilayers and obtain three consecutive nearly flat Chern bands with the same Chern number. Crucially, when the second moire miniband is half-filled, signatures of non-Abelian frctional quantum ´ Hall state are found via exact diagonalization calculations, including the stable six-fold ground state degeneracy that grows more robust with the lattice size and is consistent with an even-denominator FCI state. We further perform flux insertion simulations to reveal a 1/2 quantized many-body Chern number as direct evidence of topological order. Furthermore, the ground state density structure factors show no sharp peak, indicating no charge density wave order. These evidences signal the potential of realizing the non-Abelian state at zero magnetic field in twisted bilayer MoTe<sup>2</sup> at the fractional hole filling 3/2.

## INTRODUCTION

Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) moire systems ´ have recently attracted great attention [\[1](#page-15-1)[–4\]](#page-15-2) due to the discovery of emergent fractional Chern insulators (FCIs) [\[5](#page-15-3)[–9\]](#page-15-4) zero magnetic field analogues of the fractional quantum Hall (FQH) effect. Theoretical studies [\[10–](#page-15-5)[20\]](#page-15-6) demonstrate the engineering of topologically nontrivial flat bands in moire sys- ´ tems and the emergence of the FCI states such as the Laughlin states and other Jain sequence states [\[12,](#page-15-7) [19\]](#page-15-8), which are discovered experimentally [\[1–](#page-15-1)[4\]](#page-15-2). These results imply the resemblance of the quantum geometry of the moire Chern bands ´ to that of the lowest Landau level [\[21,](#page-15-9) [22\]](#page-15-10). This immediately prompts an interesting question [\[23](#page-15-11)[–27\]](#page-15-12): Is it possible to realize the first excited Landau level physics with non-Abelian statistics in the TMD moire system? ´

More recently, Ref. [\[28\]](#page-15-13) reported a series of quantum spin Hall plateaus in morie MoTe ´ <sup>2</sup> system at hole fillings ν = 2, 3, 4, 6 with a twist angle around θ ≈ 2.1 o . Remarkably, this ν = 3 state supports helical edge modes with the halfquantized edge conductance G = 3/2(e <sup>2</sup>/h), in sharp contrast with the previously observed valley polarized states at odd integer fillings with θ ≈ 3.7 o (e.g. ν = 1) [\[1,](#page-15-1) [2\]](#page-15-14). Intuitively, a way to understand this ν = 3 state is to examine possible phases in the second band [\[29](#page-15-15)[–31\]](#page-15-16). If the second moire band is half-filled in each valley, it may produce a ´ ν = 1/2 + 1/2 fractional quantum spin Hall insulator in the valley-decoupled limit. Together with the ν = 2 state from the filled lowest moire band, it may provide an explanation ´ for the ν = 3 state observed experimentally [\[28\]](#page-15-13). In the above scenario, one key point is if there is a fractionalized topological state at half filling of the second moire band in each valley, ´ which can survive the interaction between two valleys.

Besides the quantum spin Hall effect by filling a higher moire band, the spontaneous time reversal symmetry break- ´ ing promoted by Coulomb interaction makes the higher moire´ band a promising platform for discovering distinct non-Abelian FCIs. In the study of the half-filled first excited Landau level, the leading topological ground state candidates include the non-Abelian Pfaffian [\[32,](#page-15-17) [33\]](#page-15-18), anti-Pfaffian [\[34,](#page-15-19) [35\]](#page-16-0), and particle-hole symmetric Pfaffian states [\[36\]](#page-16-1), while there are still intense debates on which one is realized in experiments [\[37–](#page-16-2)[40\]](#page-16-3). A similarity between the second moire´ band and first excited Landau level has been illustrated [\[23–](#page-15-11) [26\]](#page-15-20) from both single particle information and many-body energy spectrum of the half-filled second moire band to indicate ´ the possibility of realizing non-Abelian states. However, the nature of the ground state for half filling of the second moire´ band remains open. There are competing states including a charge density wave (CDW) state with no topological order, and other topologically ordered states distinctly different from the Landau level counterparts due to the absence of continuous translational symmetry [\[41](#page-16-4)[–43\]](#page-16-5). These open issues motivate the current work.

In this paper, targeting the ν = 3/2 state in moire´ MoTe<sup>2</sup> for hole doping, we address the physics of the second moire band microscopically. Using the continuum model, ´ we demonstrate that the lowest three consecutive bands have Chern number C = 1 by tuning model parameters between available density-functional theory (DFT) values [\[12,](#page-15-7) [20,](#page-15-6) [26\]](#page-15-20). At ν = 3/2, the ground state demonstrates a spontaneous ferromagnetism (FM) and valley polarization driven by Coulomb interaction. Through exact diagonalization (ED) of the effective Hamiltonian projected onto the half-filled second moire´ band, we identify an incompressible insulating state with six-fold ground state degeneracy and 1/2 quantized many-body Chern number, signaling a non-Abelian type FCI. The non-Abelian state is the ground state for the moiré MoTe<sub>2</sub> system for a range of smaller twist angles, with the phase boundary tunable by the strength of the Coulomb interaction. Furthermore, we exclude CDW order by demonstrating a nearly featureless density structure factor for the ground state. These findings imply that the even-denominator 3/2 FCI is the most competitive candidate for twisted bilayer MoTe<sub>2</sub> systems at smaller twist angles.

#### RESULTS

## Band topology

The low energy physics of a hole near the single-layer K valley in the twisted bilayer  ${\rm MoTe}_2$  can be described by the continuum model

<span id="page-1-1"></span>
$$h_{\uparrow \mathbf{k}} = \begin{bmatrix} \frac{(\hat{\mathbf{k}} - K_{+})^{2}}{2m^{*}} + V_{+}(\hat{\mathbf{r}}) & \Delta(\hat{\mathbf{r}}) \\ \Delta^{+}(\hat{\mathbf{r}}) & \frac{(\hat{\mathbf{k}} - K_{-})^{2}}{2m^{*}} + V_{-}(\hat{\mathbf{r}}) \end{bmatrix}, \quad (1)$$

where  $m^* = 0.62m_e$  is the effective hole mass of the monolayer,  $K_{\pm}$  are the K valleys of the top and bottom layers that are twisted by an angle  $\theta$ , and  $V_{\pm}(\mathbf{r})$  and  $\Delta(\mathbf{r})$ are respectively the intralayer and interlayer moiré potentials [10, 12, 17]. The up arrow in  $h_{\uparrow k}$  represents the spinvalley locking. The Hamiltonian  $h_{\downarrow \mathbf{k}}$  for a hole near the single-layer K'-valley is related to Eq. (1) by the time reversal symmetry. Following Refs. [12, 18, 20, 25, 44], the moiré superlattice of the realistic MoTe<sub>2</sub> can be simulated by tuning parameters  $(V_1, V_2, W_1, W_2, \phi)$  as intra- and inter-layer first and second harmonics, and the phase difference  $\phi$  between two layers.  $V_{\pm}(\mathbf{r}) = -2V_1 \sum_{j=1,3,5} \cos(\mathbf{g_j^1 \cdot r} \pm \phi) 2V_2\sum_{j=1,3,5}\cos{(\mathbf{g_j^2\cdot r})}$  and  $\Delta(\mathbf{r})=W_1\sum_{j=1,2,3}e^{i\mathbf{q_j^1\cdot r}}+$  $W_2 \sum_{j=1,2,3} e^{i \mathbf{q_j^2 \cdot r}}$ , where  $\mathbf{g_j^1}$  ( $\mathbf{q_j^1}$ ) and  $\mathbf{g_j^2}$  ( $\mathbf{q_j^2}$ ) are the momentum differences between the nearest and second-nearest plane wave bases within the same layer (different layers).

The moiré potentials from second harmonics are crucial for accurately capturing higher energy bands from DFT calculations [18]. We calculate Bloch wave functions of moiré bands and obtain phase diagrams (Fig. 1(a1,b1)) for the band Chern numbers in a given valley in terms of the intralayer potential parameter  $V_2$  and twisted angle  $\theta$ . The topological character of moiré bands depends on  $V_2$  and  $\theta$  in a complex way and shows several distinct regimes. Remarkably, we identify a phase regime where each of the lowest three consecutive moiré bands has Chern number C=1 [45]. For one set of representative parameter values  $V_1 = 17.5$  meV,  $W_1 = -6.5$ meV,  $\phi = -58.49^{o}$ ,  $V_{2} = -10.5$  meV, and  $W_{2} = 11.75$  meV (white star in Fig. 1(a)), we show the resulting band structure along high-symmetry lines in the moiré Brillouin zone in Fig. 1(b). These lowest three topological bands are well separated from other higher energy bands. Decreasing the magni-

<span id="page-1-0"></span>FIG. 1. **Band Topology.** (a) Band structure diagram of moiré MoTe<sub>2</sub> as a function of intralayer  $V_2$  moiré potential strength and the twisted angle  $\theta$  for fixed  $V_1=17.5$  meV and  $W_1=-6.5$  meV,  $W_2=11.75$  meV and  $\phi=-58.49^\circ$ . Different phase regions are distinguished by the Chern numbers of the lowest three moiré bands  $(C_1,C_2,C_3)$  (as labeled in black color). (b) Hole bands for the typical parameters (white star dot in (a)):  $\theta=1.8^\circ$  and  $V_2=-10.5$  meV, which will be used for the many-body simulations. The lowest three moiré bands are labeled by their colors, each of which carries Chern number C=1 for the K'-valley (with opposite Chern numbers in the K-valley). (c) Heatmap of quantum metric trace condition  $\int_{B.Z.} \operatorname{tr}[g(\mathbf{k})]/2\pi (\equiv \operatorname{tr}[g_n])$  of the second lowest band as a function of  $V_2$ ,  $\theta$ . (d)  $\operatorname{tr}[g_n]$  of the lowest three bands vary as a function of twisted angle  $\theta$ . As a reference, the quantum metric of nth Landau level is 2n+1, denoted as dashed lines in the figure.

tude of  $V_2$  leads to transitions to other band topology regimes. We notice that our parameters are more suitable for small twist angles [26]. Similar physics is found by slightly changing parameters  $\phi$  and  $W_2$ .

The phase regime with three consecutive Chern bands of C=1 provides a suitable regime for targeting topological physics of excited moiré bands. Interestingly, via the calculation of quantum metric [46], we identify that the lowest band faithfully resembles the lowest Landau level, and the second lowest band also has a trace condition close to the first-excited Landau level (see Fig. 1(c,d)). Specifically, the trace condition  $\int_{\mathbb{R}^2} \operatorname{tr}[g(\mathbf{k})]/2\pi$  for Fubini-Study (FS) metric  $g(\mathbf{k})$  of the second lowest band demonstrates a non-monotonic dependence on the twisted angle  $\theta$ , which shows a minimum around  $\theta \sim 1.8^{\circ}$  with a value around 3.2 slightly larger than the value for the first excited Landau level (2n + 1 = 3 for n = 1) as shown in Fig. 1 (d). Next we will explore around the optimal parameters marked as the white stars in Fig. 1(a,c) for numerical characterizations of the half filling  $\nu = 1/2$  manybody state of the second moiré band. We believe the physics shown below should be generic and representative for the ex-

<span id="page-2-0"></span>FIG. 2. **Spin excitation gap.** The spin gap  $\Delta_s = E_0(S_z) - E_0(S_{zmax})$  for an  $N_s = 16$  system at total filling  $\nu = 3/2$  and  $\varepsilon = 5$ , as a function of the deviation of the total spin from the full polarization  $\Delta S_z = S_{zmax} - S_z$ , where  $S_{zmax} = N_h/2$  and  $E_0(S_z)$  is the lowest energy in the spin  $S_z$  sector. The inset shows spin gap  $\Delta_s$  at  $\varepsilon = 5, 10$  for  $\Delta S_z = 1$  and different system sizes. These indicate a ferromagnetic ground state in the thermodynamic limit. The band parameter set is defined in the caption of Fig. 1.

perimental systems.

#### **Many-body Interaction**

The two-body interaction takes the form

$$H_{2} = \sum_{n_{1,2},m_{1,2}} \sum_{\sigma_{1},\sigma_{2}} \sum_{\mathbf{k}_{1,2},\mathbf{q}} V_{n_{1}n_{2}m_{1}m_{2}\sigma_{1}\sigma_{2}}(\mathbf{k}_{1},\mathbf{k}_{2},\mathbf{q}) \times \hat{c}_{n_{1}\sigma_{1}\mathbf{k}_{1}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{n_{2}\sigma_{2}\mathbf{k}_{2}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{m_{1}\sigma_{2}[\mathbf{k}_{2}-\mathbf{q}]} \hat{c}_{m_{2}\sigma_{1}[\mathbf{k}_{1}+\mathbf{q}]}, \quad (2)$$

where the summation is over all band index  $n_{1,2}$ , spin/valley index  $\sigma_{1,2}$  and momenta  $\mathbf{k}_{1,2}$  and  $\mathbf{q}$ .  $\hat{c}^{\dagger}_{n\sigma\mathbf{k}}$  creates a hole in the Bloch eigenstate of  $h_{\sigma k}$  with subband index n, spin/valley  $\sigma$  and momentum  $\mathbf{k}$  in the moiré Brillouin zone.  $[\mathbf{k}] = \mathbf{k} - \mathbf{g}_k$  where the operator [] takes  $\mathbf{k}$  to its reduced vector in the moiré Brillouin zone and  $\mathbf{g}_{\mathbf{k}}$  is a moiré reciprocal lattice vector. The Bloch state interaction matrix elements are

$$V_{n_1 n_2 m_1 m_2 \sigma_1 \sigma_2}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{q}) = \frac{1}{2A} V(\mathbf{q}) f^{n_1 m_2 \sigma_1}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{q}) \times f^{n_2 m_1 \sigma_2}(\mathbf{k}_2, -\mathbf{q}), \tag{3}$$

where A is the area of the system,  ${\bf q}$  is the momentum transfer of the scattering process, and the Coulomb interaction is set to be  $V({\bf q})=\frac{e^2}{\varepsilon_0\varepsilon q}(1-\delta_{q,0})$  with the elementary charge e, vacuum permittivity  $\varepsilon_0$  and dielectric constant  $\varepsilon$ . The form factor between n and m subbands is defined as

$$f^{nm\sigma}(\mathbf{k}, \mathbf{q}) = \langle n\sigma \mathbf{k} | e^{-i\mathbf{q} \cdot \mathbf{r}} | m\sigma[\mathbf{k} + \mathbf{q}] \rangle,$$
 (4)

where  $|n\sigma \mathbf{k}\rangle$  is the Bloch eigenstate of  $h_{\sigma \mathbf{k}}$  in Eq. 1.

# Spontaneous spin polarization at $\nu = 3/2$

Since the numbers of spin- $\uparrow$  and  $\downarrow$  holes  $N_{\uparrow}$  and  $N_{\downarrow}$  are separately conserved, we can perform ED calculation for all spin configurations with different total  $S_z=(N_{\uparrow}-N_{\downarrow})/2$ . We carry out ED calculation for interacting systems with a total Hamiltonian  $H=\sum_{n\sigma\mathbf{k}}\epsilon_{n\sigma}(\mathbf{k})\hat{c}_{n\sigma\mathbf{k}}^{\dagger}\hat{c}_{n\sigma\mathbf{k}}+H_2$  at  $\nu=3/2$  within the Hilbert space of the time-reversed pair  $(\sigma=\uparrow,\downarrow)$  of the lowest two bands (n=1,2). When a band is fully occupied, the interactions between it and other bands are treated based on Hartree-Fock approximation.  $\epsilon_{n\sigma}(\mathbf{k})$  is the Bloch state energy of the n-th moiré band with spin  $\sigma$ . To obtain the energy spectrum, we study finite systems with discrete momentum points  $\mathbf{k}=k_x\mathbf{T}_1+k_y\mathbf{T}_2$  with  $\mathbf{T}_1,\mathbf{T}_2$  being unit vectors of crystal momentum, and  $k_{x(y)}=1,...,N_{x(y)}$  for system size  $N_s=N_x\times N_y$  and particle number  $N_h=N_{\uparrow}+N_{\downarrow}=\nu N_{\uparrow}$ .

The  $S_z$  of the ground state is always found to satisfy  $S_z = S_{\rm zmax} = N_h/2$  for  $N_s = 16 - 24$ , representing spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking and FM. We further identify spin gaps  $\Delta_s = E_0(S_z) - E_0(S_{zmax})$  as the energy difference between the FM ground state and the lowest energy state in spin sector  $S_z$ , which is a function of spin-flip  $\Delta S_z = S_{\rm zmax} - S_z$  as shown in Fig. 2 for the twist angle  $\theta = 1.8^{\circ}$ . A finite spin gap is found for all spin sectors for  $N_s = 16$  and  $\varepsilon = 5$  and it grows with the spin-flip  $\Delta S_z$ . Furthermore, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2, the  $\Delta S_z = 1$ spin gap is robust with a near constant value for different system sizes  $N_s = 16 - 24$  and grows with the strength of the Coulomb interaction at  $\varepsilon = 5$  and 10, indicating a finite spin gap in the thermodynamic limit, consistent with the Ising FM ground state without SU(2) spin-rotational symmetry [12, 13, 17, 43]. In the rest of this work, we will focus on the spin-polarized sector to access much larger systems.

#### Many-body energy spectrum

Next, we study spin fully polarized systems by considering the following model

$$H^{A} = \sum_{\mathbf{k}} (\epsilon_{2\uparrow}(\mathbf{k}) + \Sigma(\mathbf{k}))\hat{c}_{2\uparrow\mathbf{k}}^{+}\hat{c}_{2\uparrow\mathbf{k}} + PH_{2}P, \quad (5)$$

where  $\Sigma(\mathbf{k})$  is the standard Hartree-Fock self-energy due to the interband interaction between holes in the half-filled second moiré band and those in the filled lowest moiré band (see Supplementary Note 2 [47]) and the interaction term  $H_2$  is projected onto the second spin-up moiré band by the projection operator P.

One primary feature of a topologically ordered phase is the degenerate ground state manifold protected by a finite energy gap. The energy spectrum of  $H^A$  at  $\nu=1/2$  of the second moiré band for three system sizes  $N_s=24$ , 28 and 32 are shown in Fig. 3. We see that, for each system size, there is a ground state manifold with six-fold quasi-degenerate states

<span id="page-3-0"></span>FIG. 3. Topological ground state degeneracy. Energy spectra  $E_n$  (shifted by ground state energy) for fractional filling  $\nu=1/2$  of the second moiré MoTe<sub>2</sub> band on various system sizes (a-c)  $N_s=24,28,32$  with  $\epsilon=2$  and (d)  $N_s=32$  with  $\epsilon=1$ . The ground state manifold matching the degeneracy  $N_g=6$  is highlighted by dashed box. The standard Hartee-Fock energy is used with Hamiltonian  $H^A$ . The parameter set is defined in the caption of Fig. 1.

(indicated by the dashed box) for our systems with even number of electrons. In particular, the crystal momenta at which these ground states occur match the momenta of non-Abelian  $\nu = 1/2$  FCI based on the FQH-FCI folding scheme [6, 42], e.g. for  $N_s = 24$  two ground states occur at momentum  $(k_x, k_y) = (0,0)$  while four others are in the (2,0) sector. However, for  $N_s = 24$  and  $\varepsilon = 2$ , the ground state manifold is not separated from the low energy roton excitations[48] centered around the special momentum  $\mathbf{k} = (N_x/2, N_y/2)$  (or equivalently  $(\pi,\pi)$  point, indicating strong competition between FCI and CDW states. For  $N_s=28$  cluster with  $C_6$  rotational symmetry [12, 43], we observe a much enhanced gap between the 6-fold degenerated ground states and the other excited states with reduced finite-size effect. Remarkably, for a larger system with  $N_s = 32$ , despite its geometry similar to that of  $N_s = 24$  which allows low-energy roton excitations at  $(\pi,\pi)$ , the excitation gap between the 6th and 7th lowest states ( $\Delta = E_6 - E_5$  as we refer to the ground state as  $E_0$ ) is robust and grows more than three times from  $\Delta = 0.25$ meV to around 0.87 meV when  $\varepsilon = 2 \rightarrow 1$ . This indicates that stronger Coulomb interaction drives the system into a more robust FCI phase. The observed six-fold ground-state degeneracy precisely matches that of the Pfaffian [32, 33] or anti-Pfaffian state [34, 35], consistent with the emergence of a non-Abelian Moore-Read state.

The ED calculation is inevitably limited by the computational capacity (e.g. The Hilbert subspace of the  $N_s=32\,$ 

<span id="page-3-1"></span>FIG. 4. Many-body Chern number. (a-b) Low-energy spectra  $E_n$  (shifted by the ground state energy) at the momentum  $\mathbf{k}=(7,0)$  or (0,1) under the variation of the twisted boundary phase  $\theta_x$  for  $N_s=28$  and  $\varepsilon=2$ . (c-d) The Berry phase  $F(\theta_x,\theta_y)\Delta\theta_x\Delta\theta_y$  in the discretized Brillouin zone  $(16\times16)$  for two lowest ground states in each of the two momentum sectors, which sum up to give an exactly quantized total C=1.

has a dimension of about 19 million which is about the limit of the current ED method). A way to check the finite-size effect is to add a twisted boundary condition as a perturbation to the system, where two boundary phases  $\theta_x, \theta_y$  are introduced as generalized boundary conditions in the  $\mathbf{L}_1$  and  $\mathbf{L}_2$  directions ( $\mathbf{L}_{1,2}$  are the lattice vectors of the moiré finite size system). Under the twisted boundary conditions, the momentum of single particle shifts to  $k_{x(y)} \to k_{x(y)} + \frac{\theta_{x(y)}}{2\pi} T_{1(2)}$ , providing an effective way to scan all momenta in the Brillouin zone near continuously and identify topological Chern number which will be presented below.

# Many-body Chern number

The many-body Chern number (i.e. the Berry phase in unit of  $2\pi$ ) can be defined as an integral invariant using twisted boundary conditions [49]:  $C = \frac{1}{2\pi} \int d\theta_x d\theta_y F(\theta_x, \theta_y)$ , where the Berry curvature is given by  $F(\theta_x, \theta_y) = \operatorname{Im}\left(\left\langle \frac{\partial \Psi}{\partial \theta_y} \middle| \frac{\partial \Psi}{\partial \theta_x} \middle\rangle - \left\langle \frac{\partial \Psi}{\partial \theta_x} \middle| \frac{\partial \Psi}{\partial \theta_y} \middle\rangle \right)$ . A significant difference between FCI in topological band and FQH state is that, a FCI does not possess the continuous translational symmetry. As a consequence, a FCI phase in the topological band may have a quantized topological Chern number different from its filling number [41, 43]. Thus the many-body Chern number plays an important role for characterizing the nature of a FCI phase and provides predictions for Hall conductance quantization through the relation  $\sigma_H = Ce^2/h[5, 50]$ .

As shown in Fig. [4\(](#page-3-1)a, b), when tuning the boundary phase θ<sup>x</sup> for a system with N<sup>s</sup> = 28 and ε = 2, the lowest twofold nearly degenerated ground states in momenta (7, 0) and (0, 1) sectors are generally separated from the excited states by direct gaps , which allows an accurate determination of the many-body topological Chern number[\[5,](#page-15-3) [50\]](#page-16-13) despite larger energy variances when non-zero boundary phases are present. We discretize the boundary phase space into M<sup>c</sup> × M<sup>c</sup> square meshes (with M<sup>c</sup> ≥ 16) and numerically obtain the Berry curvature F(θx, θy) for each square [\[5,](#page-15-3) [51,](#page-16-14) [52\]](#page-16-15). We show the total Berry phase, which is proportional to Berry curvature for each square mesh in Fig. [4\(](#page-3-1)c,d) at N<sup>s</sup> = 28 and ε = 2 with momentum (7, 0) and (0, 1), respectively. By integrating the Berry curvatures over the boundary phase space, we find total Berry phase of 2π or quantized total Chern number C = 1 for the two lowest ground states in both momentum sectors. This result confirms that each nearly degenerate ground state [\[50\]](#page-16-13) carries a fractional Chern number C = 1/2 and the Hall conductance is quantized at σ<sup>H</sup> = 1 2 e <sup>2</sup>/h (the sign of the Chern number is the same as the band Chern number and an additional contribution of e <sup>2</sup>/h from the filled lowest band should be taken into account to compare with experimental observations).

# Non-Abelian quasiparticle statistics

After determining the topological nature of the groundstate manifold, we further inspect the non-Abelian quasiparticle statistics through the entanglement spectroscopy with the particle-cut entanglement spectrum (PES) [\[53\]](#page-16-16). By dividing the whole system into N<sup>A</sup> and N<sup>h</sup> −N<sup>A</sup> particles, we identify a clear entanglement gap separating the low-lying PES levels from higher ones (Fig. [8\(](#page-13-0)a)) for N<sup>A</sup> = 3 and N<sup>s</sup> = 28. There are 3192 spectrum levels below this gap exactly matching the typical counting of quasiparticle excitations resulting from the generalized Pauli principle of the non-Abelian (anti-

<span id="page-4-1"></span>FIG. 5. The PES and counting. The N<sup>s</sup> = 28 system is partitioned into N<sup>A</sup> and N<sup>h</sup> − N<sup>A</sup> particles respectively to obtain PES with (a) N<sup>A</sup> = 3, with 3192 states below the entanglement gap and (b) N<sup>A</sup> = 4, the entanglement gap closes. The density matrix is defined as ρ = 1 Ng P<sup>N</sup><sup>g</sup> <sup>n</sup>=1 |Ψn⟩⟨Ψn|, where |Ψn⟩ denotes the N<sup>g</sup> = 6 quasidegenerate ground states.

<span id="page-4-0"></span>FIG. 6. Static Structure Factor. (a) Density structure factor S(q) and (b) momentum-space hole distribution n(k). Here we set ε = 2 and N<sup>s</sup> = 32.

)Pfaffian state [\[6\]](#page-15-25) (at most 2 particles in 4 consecutive orbitals). A similar result is found for N<sup>s</sup> = 24 system with 1952 states below the entanglement gap at N<sup>A</sup> = 3. Based on the correspondence between the PES and the quasiparticle excitations [\[53\]](#page-16-16), this finding further indicates the non-Abelian nature of the half-filled state. Furthermore, we find the gap in PES shrinks for the case of N<sup>A</sup> = 4 (Fig. [8\(](#page-13-0)b)), consistent with observations in other non-Abelian candidates[\[24\]](#page-15-26), which may indicate important contributions from other higher level quasi-particles or from other low energy competing states.

# Structure factors

We further investigate the CDW instability. We calculate the projected structure factor as

$$S(\mathbf{q}) = \frac{\langle \overline{\rho}(\mathbf{q})\overline{\rho}(-\mathbf{q})\rangle}{N_s} - \frac{\langle \overline{\rho}(0)\rangle^2}{N_s} \delta_{\mathbf{q},\mathbf{0}},\tag{6}$$

where ρ(q) = P i e −iq·r<sup>i</sup> is the projected density operator and r<sup>i</sup> is the hole position. In Fig. [6\(](#page-4-0)a), S(q) exhibits very weak feature with slightly enhanced intensity around the middle of the Brillouin zone, but lacks strong peaks as expected for a crystal, excluding the CDW as an instability at halffilling of the second moire band. In comparison, the momen- ´ tum space occupation numbers n(k) (Fig. [6\(](#page-4-0)b)) are near constant with smaller variance with k, consistent with a topological state.

# Robustness of non-Abelian FCI

At last, we discuss the robustness of the non-Abelian FCI state. Here we mainly focus on two factors: twisted angle θ that controls the single-particle band structure and the dielectric constant ε that controls the Coulomb interaction strength. Fig. [7](#page-5-0) demonstrates the evolution of many-body energy spectra by varying θ and ε, respectively. By fixing ε = 2, we find that the non-Abelian FCI state is favored around the optimal angle θ ∼ 1.8 o at N<sup>s</sup> = 16 indicated by the green shaded

<span id="page-5-0"></span>FIG. 7. **Robustness of non-Abelian FCI.** Energy spectra  $E_n$  (shifted by ground state energy) at fractional filling  $\nu=1/2$  of the second moiré band of MoTe<sub>2</sub> at various  $\varepsilon$  and  $\theta$ . The parameter regimes for the non-Abelian FCI are labeled by the green shades. We show 6-lowest states ( $E_{0-5}$ ) and excited state ( $E_6$ ) with  $\mathbf{k_0}=(\mathbf{0},\mathbf{0})$  ( $N_s=16$ ) or M points ( $N_s=28$ ); and lowest excited state  $E_0$  with  $\mathbf{k_1}$  at M ( $N_s=16$ ), or (0,0) point ( $N_s=28$ ). (a,b) Energy spectra and non-Abelian FCI phases for  $N_s=16$  by varying  $\theta$  or  $\varepsilon$ , respectively. The symbols for ground states and excited states are defined in (b) and applicable to all figures; (c,b) Energy spectra and non-abelian FCI phases for  $N_s=28$ .

area, where the ground state has approximately six fold degeneracy, separated with other excited states by a small gap (Fig. 7(a)). The non-Abelian FCI phase expands to cover the regime  $1.5^o < \theta < 2.0^o$  for a larger system size  $N_s = 28$  (Fig. 7(c)) , with an excitation gap away from the phase boundaries much larger than the splitting of the six-fold near degenerating ground states. At fixed twisted angle  $\theta = 1.8^o$ , we find that the non-Abelian state is established in the strong interaction regime (small dielectric constant  $\varepsilon \lesssim 7.0$  see Fig. 7(b,d)). This supports that strong correlation is necessary to stabilize more robust non-Abelian FCI phase.

# DISCUSSION

We have performed a systematic study on the half-filled second moiré band of the twisted MoTe<sub>2</sub> systems. We offer numerical evidence of an emergent non-Abelian FCI phase with six-fold ground state degeneracy. By studying various system sizes, we conclude that this ground state manifold is robust and protected by a finite energy gap. Furthermore, the folding of momentum quantum numbers of the ground states, and the half integer quantized topological Chern num-

ber demonstrate this even denominator topological state to be a non-Abelian FCI state. The featureless density structrue factor supports the absence of a co-existing crystal order at small twist angles  $1.5^{\circ} < \theta < 2.0^{\circ}$ . Such a FCI state is seen to grow more robust with the increase of system size, similar to the non-Abelian states of the first excited Landau level, which makes the experimental detection promising. Additional results with modified kinetic energies connecting the realistic model we study with flatband limit demonstrate similar physics, which are presented in Supplementary Note 1 [47]).

Although the many-body spectrum and Chern number quantization of the even denominator FCI of twisted MoTe<sub>2</sub> system fit the expectation of Moore-Read Pfaffian (anti-Pfaffian) state, which type of topological order is realized for this novel state may require future study. Our results suggest both Pfaffian and anti-Pfaffian as the most likely candidates. Historically, the nature of the half-filled first excited Landau level quantum Hall effect is a long-standing issue, i.e. several candidates such as the Pfaffian state, anti-Pfaffian state and particle-hole symmetric Pfaffian state, are competing states if particle-hole symmetry breaking effects are neglected. In the twisted TMD systems, the particle-hole symmetry is explicitly broken by the non-zero kinetic dispersion and orbital dependent Berry curvature, which makes the particle-hole Pfaffian less likely to be a competing phase in our system. However, as the quantum metric of the second moiré band is very close to the first excited Landau level [24, 26, 54], this many-body state may be primarily inherited from the particle-particle interaction rather than the kinetic energy. With the emergence of the many-body translational symmetry [42] for this FCI, there is a possible emergence of particle-hole symmetry. We believe these open questions can be addressed in the future which will advance our theoretical understanding of non-Abelian physics. Our work makes a concrete prediction for realizing such a non-Abelian phase in twisted moiré systems at half filling of the second moiré band, which will stimulate experimental discoveries along this direction. Interestingly, a recent work considering spinful systems at total filling  $\nu = 3$  suggests that a spin unpolarized state is possible by weakening the short-range interaction between holes with opposite spins[55]. This leaves the opportunity for time-reversal invariant quantum spin Hall phases to emerge[28] or to compete with Ising spin polarized states, which we leave for future studies.

# **METHODS**

The topological band model for twisted bilayer MoTe<sub>2</sub> system is numerically simulated using the exact diagonalization (ED). In this paper, the system size varies from  $N_s=16$  to 32. For each system size, the calculation can be paralleled by using the total momentum of particles  $(k_x,k_y)$ . The Hilbert subspace of the  $N_s=32$  has the dimensions of about 19 million which is about the limit of the current ED method.

# Calculation of Chern number for many-body state

The Chern number of a many-body state can be obtained as an integral invariant using twisted boundary conditions [49]:  $C = \frac{1}{2\pi} \int d\theta_x d\theta_y F(\theta_x,\theta_y), \text{ where the Berry curvature is given by } F(\theta_x,\theta_y) = \operatorname{Im}\left(\left\langle \frac{\partial \Psi}{\partial \theta_y} \middle| \frac{\partial \Psi}{\partial \theta_x} \right\rangle - \left\langle \frac{\partial \Psi}{\partial \theta_x} \middle| \frac{\partial \Psi}{\partial \theta_y} \right\rangle\right).$  To determine the Chern number accurately, we divide the boundary-phase unit cell into  $M_c \times M_c$  meshes with  $M_c \geq 16$ . The Berry curvature is then given by the Berry phase of each mesh divided by the area of the mesh. The Chern number is obtained by summing up the Berry phases of all the meshes.

# Projected structure factor

The projected structure factor is defined as  $S(\mathbf{q}) = \frac{\langle \overline{\rho}(\mathbf{q}) \overline{\rho}(-\mathbf{q}) \rangle}{N_s} - \frac{\langle \overline{\rho}(\mathbf{0}) \rangle^2}{N_s} \delta_{\mathbf{q},\mathbf{0}}$ , with  $\overline{\rho}(\mathbf{q}) = \sum_i e^{-i\mathbf{q}\cdot\mathbf{r}_i}$  as the projected density operator and  $\mathbf{r}_i$  is the hole position. Through analyzing the  $\mathbf{q}$  dependence of  $S(\mathbf{q})$ , one can identify or exclude possible CDW order of the ground states.

#### SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

The Supplementary information contains more details to support the discussion in the main text.

Supplementary Figure 1: Many-body energy spectra for a model with modified kinetic energy connecting realistic twisted MoTe<sub>2</sub> system to its flatband limit.

Supplementary Figure 2: Phase diagram for non-Abelian state with varying the modified kinetic energy.

Supplementary Figure 3: Renormalized single-particle band structure.

Supplementary Figure 4: Many-body energy spectra for a model with modified Hartree-Fock self-energy for even number of particles.

Supplementary Figure 5: Many-body energy spectra for systems with odd number of particles.

Supplementary Figure 6: Berry curvature  $F(\theta_x,\theta_y)\Delta\theta_x\Delta\theta_y$  for  $N_s=28$  system.

Supplementary Figure 7: Density structure factor and momentum distribution function for  $N_s=28$  system.

Supplementary Figure 8: Entanglement spectroscopy with the particle-cut entanglement spectra for  $N_s = 28$ .

Supplementary Figure 9: Many-body energy spectra at  $N_s = 16, 24, 28$  and 32 for  $\theta = 2.1^{\circ}$ .

# **AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS**

W.Z. and D.N.S. initiated the project. All authors contributed to the simulations, analysis of the data and writing of the manuscript.

#### DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available in the GitHub repository (https://github.com/cfengno1/Non-Abelian-FQHE-in-Moire-Systems/tree/main/Data).

## **CODE AVAILABILITY**

Source codes for the numerical simulations are available in the GitHub repository (https://github.com/cfengno1/Non-Abelian-FQHE-in-Moire-Systems/tree/main/Code).

#### ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We acknowledge stimulating discussions with Zhao Liu, Tiansheng Zeng, Yang Zhang and Cheng Xu. D.N.S thanks Liang Fu, A. P. Reddy, A. Abouelkomsan and E. J. Bergholtz for collaborations on Hall-crystals of moiré system and helpful discussions. This work was primarily supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Grant No. DE-FG02-06ER46305 (F.C., D.N.S.) for studying interacting topological systems. W.Z. is supported by the foundation of Westlake University. W.W.L. is supported by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China.

# NOTE ADDED

We recently became aware of related works on this topic [24–27]. While our scope is different, their results on band structures or many-body energy spectra of related models are qualitatively consistent with our results. At the final stage of this work, we learned of a parallel work [56] that addresses similar issues in a multi-layer graphene-based moiré system.

Supplementary Figure 1. Energy spectra at  $N_s=24,28$  and  $\theta=1.8^{\circ}$  for the model in the flat-band limit (a,b) with  $\lambda=0$  or with reduced strength of the kinetic energy (c,d) at  $\lambda=0.5$ . Other parameters are noted in the caption of Fig. 1 in the main text.

# Supplementary Information for: "Robust non-Abelian even-denominator fractional Chern insulator in twisted bilayer MoTe<sub>2</sub>"

In the Supplementary Information, we provide additional numerical results to support the conclusion we have discussed in the main text. Note 1 provides understanding of how the realistic twisted MoTe<sub>2</sub> system and its flatband limit are connected by gradually reducing the strength of the kinetic energy term in the continue model. Note 2 provides details of renormalized band structure based on interband interaction and introduces model B ( $H^B$ ), which has reduced Hartree-Fock self-energy. Following that, we provide more results for model B ( $H^B$ ) in Note 3-7. Note 3 shows energy spectra for different system sizes to demonstrate the even-odd effect consistent with non-Abelian (anti-)Pfaffian state. Note 4 shows the Berry phases for systems  $N_s = 28$  and robust Chern number quantization for the non-Abelian state. Note 5 has density structure factor and momentum distribution function for  $N_s = 28$  system to demonstrate very similar results as  $N_s = 32$  shown in the main text. In Note 6, we provide results on particle partition entanglement spectrum. These results further support our main conclusion that the 3/2 non-Abelian even denominator fractional Chern insulator is robust. While all these results are presented for twist angle  $\theta = 1.8^{\circ}$ , in Note 7 we show evidence of the non-Abelian fractional Chern insulator (NFCI) for twist angle  $\theta = 2.1^{\circ}$ .

# Supplementary Note 1: Non-Abelian topological phase with reduced kinetic energies: from flatband limit to realistic moiré model for MoTe<sub>2</sub> system

In the main text, we have studied the model Hamiltonian

$$H^{A} = \sum_{\mathbf{k}} (\varepsilon_{0}(\mathbf{k}) + \Sigma(\mathbf{k}))\hat{c}_{2\mathbf{k}}^{+}\hat{c}_{2\mathbf{k}} + PH_{2}P, \tag{1}$$

where  $\varepsilon_0(\mathbf{k})$  is the orbital energy for Bloch states and  $\Sigma(\mathbf{k})$  is the standard Hartree-Fock self-energy due to interband interaction (see next section) and the interaction term  $H_2$  is being projected into second moiré band (for simplicity, we do not show explicitly

Supplementary Figure 2. Energy spectra and NFCI phase for (a) $N_s=16$ ; (b) $N_s=24$ ; (c)  $N_s=28$ . We show 6-lowest states  $(E_{0-5})$  and excited state  $(E_6)$  with  $\mathbf{k_0}=(\mathbf{0},\mathbf{0})$  for  $N_s=16$ , (0,0) and  $(N_x/2,0)$  for  $N_s=24$ , and three M points for  $N_s=28$ ; and lowest excited state  $E_0$  from another momentum sector  $\mathbf{k_1}$  at M point for  $N_s=16$ ,  $(N_x/2,N_y/2)$  for  $N_s=24$ , and (0,0) for  $N_s=28$ , respectively.

the spin dependence of the band). Here we modify the kinetic energy to  $H_k(\lambda) = \sum_{\mathbf{k}} \lambda(\varepsilon_0(\mathbf{k}) + \Sigma(\mathbf{k})) \hat{c}_{2\mathbf{k}}^+ \hat{c}_{2\mathbf{k}}$ , taking  $\lambda = 0 \to 1$  to connect the flatband limit  $(\lambda = 0)$  to realistic MoTe<sub>2</sub> model at  $\lambda = 1$ .

In Supplementary Fig. 1 we show the energy spectrum for  $\varepsilon=2$ ,  $N_s=24$  and 28 at  $\lambda=0$  and 0.5, respectively. For  $N_s=24$  (Supplementary Fig. 1(a,c)), we find six near degenerating ground states from  $\mathbf{k}=(0,0),(2,0)$  sectors, which are not separated from roton excitations at other M-points  $(0,N_y/2)$  and  $(N_x/2,N_y/2)$ . These energy spectra are similar to the one for the realistic model  $H^A$  (or  $\lambda=1$ ) shown in the main text, but with enhanced competition between non-Abelian state and competing charge density wave (CDW). This may be understood as following. At the flatband limit ( $\lambda=0$ ), the effective model with interaction has approximate particle-hole symmetry, which allows a 12-fold near degeneracy for possible Pfaffian or anti-Pfaffian candidate states, and their superpositions. This enlarged degeneracy also makes it more flexible towards developing CDW order to co-eixst with topological order for a finite system, making it harder to determine the nature of the quantum state at thermodynamic limit. In fact, this particle-hole symmetric flatband limit is similar to the first excited Landau level physics. For  $N_s=28$ , due to larger system sizes and high symmetry of the cluster ( $C_6$  rotational symmetry) [43], we find an enhanced six fold ground state degeneracy, which are well separated from all other excitations, in consistent with a non-Abelian FCI state. Even in this case, we find possible 12-fold degeneracy for both  $\lambda=0.0,0.5$  below other excited states (in the same momentum sectors as the lowest 6-states), indicating the possible competing physics at  $\lambda=0$  or  $\lambda=0.5$ .

We further explore the evolution of the energy spectra for  $\nu=1/2$  filled second moiré band as a function of  $\lambda=0\to 1.0$  for  $\theta=1.8^o$  and  $N_s=16,24,28$  as shown in Supplementary Fig. 2(a,b,c). For smaller cluster  $N_s=16$  with rotational symmetry, we find well defined six fold ground state degeneracy in the  $\mathbf{k}=(0,0)$  sector, in consistent with a non-Abelian FCI phase for the whole range of the  $\lambda$ . However, the gap between a roton excitation  $(E_0(\mathbf{k}_1))$  and six-fold near degenerating states is relatively small, which grows bigger at  $\lambda\geq0.5$  side and remains robust for the realistic model of tMoTe<sub>2</sub> at  $\lambda=1.0$ . For  $N_s=24$ , we see much stronger competition between non-Abelian state and CDW order, which may co-exist for this cluster, and we label shaded regime as NFCI for  $\lambda\geq0.7$ , where 6-fold degenerating non-Abelian states are below other excited states although with very tiny gap. Importantly, for larger and higher symmetry cluster with  $N_s=28$ , we find the whole regime as a robust NFCI phase, with excitation gap much larger than the splitting of the six near degenerating ground states. Thus we conclude, from the flatband limit to realistic tMoTe<sub>2</sub> model, the non-Abelian state is the most robust candidate state at  $\nu=1/2$  of the second moiré band.

# Supplementary Note 2: Renormalized band structure and interband interaction

Here we consider interaction between the first moire band and the second moire band at total filling  $\nu=3/2$  with polarized spins, by assuming the first band is fully occupied. The interband interaction is written as

$$\hat{H}^{\text{inter}} = \sum_{\mathbf{k}_{1-4}, n, m} \hat{c}_{n\mathbf{k}_{1}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}_{2}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}_{3}} \hat{c}_{n\mathbf{k}_{4}} V_{nmmn}(\mathbf{k}_{1}, \mathbf{k}_{2}, \mathbf{k}_{3}, \mathbf{k}_{4})$$

$$+ \sum_{\mathbf{k}_{1-4}, n, m} \hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}_{1}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{n\mathbf{k}_{2}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}_{3}} \hat{c}_{n\mathbf{k}_{4}} V_{mnmn}(\mathbf{k}_{1}, \mathbf{k}_{2}, \mathbf{k}_{3}, \mathbf{k}_{4})$$
(2)

where  $\hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}}^+$  is the creation operator of a hole in the m band with momentum  $\mathbf{k}$  in the moiré Brillouin zone. n(m)=1,2 is the band index and n,m are not equal with each other. The matrix element  $V_{n_1,n_2,n_3,n_3}(\mathbf{k}_1,\mathbf{k}_2,\mathbf{k}_3,\mathbf{k}_4)$  denotes

$$V_{n_1 n_2 n_3 n_4}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{k}_3, \mathbf{k}_4) = \frac{1}{2A} \sum_{\mathbf{q}} \delta_{\mathbf{k}_4, [\mathbf{k}_1 + \mathbf{q}]} \delta_{\mathbf{k}_3, [\mathbf{k}_2 - \mathbf{q}]} V(\mathbf{q}) f^{n_1, n_4}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{q}) f^{n_2, n_3}(\mathbf{k}_2, -\mathbf{q})$$
(3)

q is the momentum transfer for Coulomb interaction and the operator  $[\ ]$  takes  $k \pm q$  to its reduced vector in the moiré Brillouin zone. Alternatively

$$V_{n_1 n_2 n_3 n_4}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{q}) = \frac{1}{2A} V(\mathbf{q}) f^{n_1, n_4}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{q}) f^{n_2, n_3}(\mathbf{k}_2, -\mathbf{q})$$
(4)

where A is the area of the system, V(q) is Coulomb interaction in momentum space.

$$f^{n_1 n_2}(\mathbf{k}, \mathbf{q}) = \langle n_1 \mathbf{k} | e^{-i\mathbf{q} \cdot \mathbf{r}} | n_2 [\mathbf{k} + \mathbf{q}] \rangle$$
 (5)

where  $|n\mathbf{k}\rangle$  is the Bloch eigenstate of moiré system.

Supplementary Figure 3. (a) Single-particle band structure of the first (purple) and second (blue) moire band. The energy band gap is round 6meV. (b) The renormalized second moire band by considering the standard Hartree-Fock correction. The renormalized band becomes more dispersive due to the HF self-energy, with the band fluctuation around 9meV. (c) The renormalized second moire band by considering the empirical Hartree-Fock self-energy correction. The parameters are set to be  $V_1=17.5$  meV,  $W_1=-6.5$  meV,  $\phi=-56.49^\circ$ ,  $V_2=-11$  meV,  $W_2=12$  meV,  $\varepsilon=5$ . x,y-axis are momentum  $k_x,k_y$  in the Brillouin zone and z-axis is the band energy.

Supplementary Figure 4. Energy spectra  $E_n$  (shifted by ground state energy) for fractional filling  $\nu=1/2$  of the second moiré MoTe<sub>2</sub> band on various system sizes (a)  $N_s=16$ , (b) 24, (c) 28, (d) 32 by setting  $\varepsilon=5$ . The ground state manifold matching the degeneracy  $N_g=6$  is highlighted by dashed box. The inset shows the energy gap (difference between the seventh and sixth lowest states) versus  $1/N_s$ . This is for Model B.

Supplementary Figure 5. Energy spectra for (a)  $N_s = 26$  and (b)  $N_s = 30$  both have odd number of holes with a ground-state degeneracy  $N_g = 2$ .

The Hartree-Fock term can be written as

$$h_{\mathrm{H}} = \sum_{\mathbf{k}_{1}\mathbf{k}_{2}} \sum_{nm} V_{nmmn}(\mathbf{k}_{1}, \mathbf{k}_{2}, \mathbf{k}_{3} = \mathbf{k}_{2}, \mathbf{k}_{4} = \mathbf{k}_{1}) \left[ \rho_{m,m}(\mathbf{k}_{2}) \hat{c}_{n\mathbf{k}_{1}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{n\mathbf{k}_{1}} + \rho_{n,n}(\mathbf{k}_{1}) \hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}_{2}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}_{2}} \right]$$

$$h_{\mathrm{F}} = -\sum_{\mathbf{k}_{1}\mathbf{k}_{2}} \sum_{nm} V_{mnmn}(\mathbf{k}_{1}, \mathbf{k}_{2}, \mathbf{k}_{3} = \mathbf{k}_{1}, \mathbf{k}_{4} = \mathbf{k}_{2}) \left[ \rho_{m,m}(\mathbf{k}_{2}) \hat{c}_{n\mathbf{k}_{1}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{n\mathbf{k}_{1}} + \hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}_{2}}^{\dagger} \hat{c}_{m\mathbf{k}_{2}} \rho_{n,n}(\mathbf{k}_{1}) \right]$$

$$(6)$$

where  $\rho_{n,n}(k)=<\hat{c}_{nk}^{\dagger}\hat{c}_{nk}>$ . Thus we obtain the normal Hartree-Fock self-energy correction to the second moire band as

$$\Sigma(\mathbf{k}_1) = 2\sum_{\mathbf{k}_2} V_{2112}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{k}_3 = \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{k}_4 = \mathbf{k}_1) - 2\sum_{\mathbf{k}_2} V_{2121}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{k}_3 = \mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{k}_4 = \mathbf{k}_2)$$
(7)

In Supplementary Fig. 3 (b), we plot the renormalized dispersion of the second moire band by taking into account the normal Hartree-Fock self-energy  $\Sigma(\mathbf{k}_1)$ . We find the band becomes more dispersive, i.e. the band width of non-renormalized band is around 2meV but the renormalized band width becomes larger than 9meV for  $\varepsilon = 5$ .

Next we try to introduce an empirical modified Hartree-Fock self-energy function as

$$\tilde{\Sigma}(\mathbf{k}_1) = 2\sum_{\mathbf{k}_2} V_{2112}(\mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{k}_3 = \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{k}_4 = \mathbf{k}_1) - 2\sum_{\mathbf{k}_2} V_{2121}(\mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{k}_1, \mathbf{k}_3 = \mathbf{k}_2, \mathbf{k}_4 = \mathbf{k}_1)$$
(8)

Using this empirical self-energy, the bandwidth of the renormalized band structure is relatively small, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 3(c). This empirical self-energy function is helpful to stablize the non-Abelian liquid state. In the following sections, we will provide additional results using model B with a Hamiltonian  $H^B = \sum_{\mathbf{k}} (\varepsilon_0(\mathbf{k}) + \tilde{\Sigma}(\mathbf{k})) \hat{c}_{2\mathbf{k}}^+ \hat{c}_{2\mathbf{k}} + PH_2P$  for  $\varepsilon = 5$  to show evidences of a stronger non-Abelian phase with reduced self-energy.

# Supplementary Note 3: Energy spectra for different system sizes

We consider spin polarized hole systems projected into the second lowest moiré energy band. The long-range Coulomb interaction is considered with a dielectric constant  $\varepsilon=5$ . We diagonalize the many-body Hamiltonian in momentum space, and label energy eigenstates with momentum quantum number  $\mathbf{k}=k_x\mathbf{T}_1+k_y\mathbf{T}_2$  with  $\mathbf{T}_1,\mathbf{T}_2$  as unit vectors of crystal momentum. We consider a finite size system with  $N_s=N_x\times N_y$  unit cells, where  $N_x,N_y$  determine the number of discretized momentum points along  $T_1$  and  $T_2$  directions, respectively.

Supplementary Figure 6. Berry curvature F(θx, θy)∆θx∆θ<sup>y</sup> on the N<sup>s</sup> = 28 of Model B by discretizing the boundary phase space into 16 × 16 meshes in the ground state with momentum (a) k = (0, 1) and (b) k = (7, 0). The total Chern numbers are obtained by summing over the Berry curvature, leading to a quantized value C = 1/2 for each state.

Supplementary Figure 7. (a) Density structure factor S(q) and (b) momentum distribution function n(k) of the ground state on system size N<sup>s</sup> = 28 with momentum (0, 0) of model B.

The energy spectrum for H<sup>B</sup> of four system sizes N<sup>s</sup> = 16 − 32 are shown in Supplementary Fig. [4,](#page-3-1) where six-fold quasidegenerate ground states (indicated by the dashed box) are found for all system sizes with moderate Coulomb interaction ε = 5 . Significantly, the ground state manifold is well separated from the higher energy spectrum by a finite gap for all system sizes. While our energy spectra agree with smaller system results [\[24](#page-15-26)[–27\]](#page-15-12), the larger system N<sup>s</sup> = 32 is important for demonstrating a trend of smoothly increasing excitation gap for N<sup>s</sup> = 16, 24, 32, which suggests that such a gapped phase should survive in the thermodynamic limit.

For comparison, the energy spectra of the system sizes N<sup>s</sup> = 26 and 30 are shown in Supplementary Fig. [5](#page-4-1) for θ = 1.8 o . In both cases, the hole particle number N<sup>h</sup> = Ns/2 in the projected moire band is an odd number. There are two ground states in ´ different momenta sectors, in consistent with the generalized Pauli principle and the admission rule for Pfaffian (or anti-Pfaffian) state. The even-odd effect further confirms the obtained even-denominator FCI has non-Abelian origin.

# Supplementary Note 4: Additional results for Berry curvature and Chern number

To probe the topological order of the many-body state, we calculate the many-body Chern number as an integral invariant of many-body wavefunction over twist boundary phase space. We discretize the boundary phase space into Mc×M<sup>c</sup> square meshes, and calculate Berry phase Bph, which is proportional to Berry curvature F(θx, θy) as Bph = F(θx, θy)∆θx∆θ<sup>y</sup> for each square. This is done through calculating the consecutive wave function overlaps Bph(θx, θy) = arg( Q i=1,4 ⟨Ψ<sup>i</sup> |Ψi+1⟩) with |Ψi⟩ (i is defined mod 4) representing four states at the four corners of the mesh square. In calculating the overlap ⟨Ψ<sup>i</sup> |Ψi+1⟩, the ∆θx(y) should be small enough so that |Bph(θx, θy)| ≪ π and |⟨Ψ<sup>i</sup> |Ψi+1⟩| ∼ 1.0. We need to expand |Ψi⟩ into the original momentum basis for the continuum model, so that the contribution from the Berry curvature of the single particle orbitals in the moire band ´ can be taken into account. The total Chern number is obtained as C = P <sup>B</sup>ph(θx,θy) 2π over all the mesh squares in the 2π × 2π boundary phase space.

We show the Berry curvature in Supplementary Fig. [6](#page-4-0) for larger system N<sup>s</sup> = 28, which is very uniform in the whole boundary phase space with small fluctuations. By integrating the Berry curvature over the boundary phase space, we obtain total Berry phase 2π shared by two ground states. Another pair of ground states in the momentum (7, 1) sector has the same feature, which is not shown here. Thus each nearly degenerate ground state carries fractional Chern number C = 1/2 and Hall conductance is quantized at σxy = 1 2 e <sup>2</sup>/h. We have confirmed the same results for other system sizes N<sup>s</sup> = 16, 24.

# Supplementary Note 5: Additional results for density structure factor and momentum distribution function

As shown in Supplementary Fig. [7](#page-5-0) for a system size N<sup>s</sup> = 28, the projected density structure factor S(q) for the ground state shows very weak circular-like peaks in the middle of the moire Brillouin zone, indicating low energy density fluctuations. ´ However, there are no sharp peaks. The momentum distribution function n(k) is near uniform. Both results further confirm no instability of charge density wave.

## Supplementary Note 6: Non-Abelian quasiparticle statistics from PES

After determining the topological nature of the ground-state manifold, we further inspect the non-Abelian quasiparticle statistics through the entanglement spectroscopy with the particle-cut entanglement spectrum (PES) [\[53\]](#page-16-16). By dividing the whole system into N<sup>A</sup> and N<sup>h</sup> − N<sup>A</sup> particles, we identify a clear entanglement gap separating the low-lying PES levels from higher ones (Supplementary Fig. [8\)](#page-13-0) for N<sup>s</sup> = 28 and N<sup>A</sup> = 3. The number of PES levels below this gap exactly matches the typical counting of quasiparticle excitations resulting from the generalized Pauli principle of the non-Abelian (anti-)Pfaffian state [\[6\]](#page-15-25) (at most 2 particles in 4 consecutive orbitals). Similar results are found for different sizes N<sup>s</sup> = 16, 24 for B (H<sup>B</sup>) model (not shown here). Based on the correspondence between the PES and the quasiparticle excitations [\[53\]](#page-16-16), this finding further indicates a non-Abelian nature of this half-filled state. Additionally, we find the gap in PES survives for N<sup>A</sup> = 4 for N<sup>s</sup> = 28 system,

<span id="page-13-0"></span>Supplementary Figure 8. The PES of Model B (H<sup>B</sup>) for N<sup>s</sup> = 28 by dividing the system into N<sup>A</sup> and N<sup>h</sup> − N<sup>A</sup> particles. (a) N<sup>A</sup> = 3 and (b) N<sup>A</sup> = 4 with 3276 and 18571 levels below the entanglement gap (the dashed line) respectively. The density matrix is defined as ρ = Ng P<sup>N</sup><sup>g</sup> <sup>n</sup>=1 |Ψn⟩⟨Ψn| [\[53\]](#page-16-16), where |Ψn⟩ denotes the six quasi-degenerate ground states.

<span id="page-14-1"></span>Supplementary Figure 9. Energy spectra at (a) N<sup>s</sup> = 16, (b) 24, (c) 28 and (d) 32 for θ = 2.1 with V<sup>2</sup> = −18meV and other parameters remain the same for model B.

which shrinks to a smaller value indicating there are contributions from other low energy competing states in consistent with results shown in main text.

#### Supplementary Note 7: Energy spectrum for a different twist angle θ = 2.1 o

The energy spectra of four system sizes N<sup>s</sup> = 16, 24, 28 and 32 are shown in Supplementary Fig. [9](#page-14-1) for θ = 2.1 <sup>o</sup> with a different V<sup>2</sup> = −18meV while we keep other parameters (V1, W1, W2, ϕ) unchanged. A small change of parameter V<sup>2</sup> can make the FCI phase more robust and reduce finite size effect. This is similar to tune Haldane pseudopotential in studying fractional quantum Hall effect in Landau levels. We can see that, for N<sup>s</sup> = 16, there are strong competition between the FCI state with degeneracy at k = (0, 0) sector, and low energy states at M points. For each larger system with N<sup>s</sup> = 24−32, there is a ground state manifold with six-fold quasi-degenerate states (indicated by the dashed box). In particular, the crystal momenta at which the degenerate ground states occur precisely match those of the Pfaffian or anti-Pfaffian state, which is consistent with the emergence of non-Abelian state at θ = 2.1 o .

<span id="page-14-0"></span><sup>∗</sup> [zhuwei@westlake.edu.cn](mailto:zhuwei@westlake.edu.cn)

#### <span id="page-15-0"></span>† [donna.sheng1@csun.edu](mailto:donna.sheng1@csun.edu)

- <span id="page-15-1"></span>[1] J. Cai, E. Anderson, C. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Liu, W. Holtzmann, Y. Zhang, F. Fan, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Ran, T. Cao, L. Fu, D. Xiao, W. Yao, and X. Xu, Signatures of fractional quantum anomalous hall states in twisted mote2, Nature 622[, 63 \(2023\).](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06289-w)
- <span id="page-15-14"></span>[2] H. Park, J. Cai, E. Anderson, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Liu, C. Wang, W. Holtzmann, C. Hu, Z. Liu, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J.-H. Chu, T. Cao, L. Fu, W. Yao, C.-Z. Chang, D. Cobden, D. Xiao, and X. Xu, Observation of fractionally quantized anomalous hall effect, [Nature](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06536-0) 622[, 74 \(2023\).](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06536-0)
- [3] Y. Zeng, Z. Xia, K. Kang, J. Zhu, P. Knuppel, C. Vaswani, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. F. Mak, and J. Shan, Thermodynamic evidence ¨ of fractional chern insulator in moire mote2, ´ Nature 622[, 69 \(2023\).](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06452-3)
- <span id="page-15-2"></span>[4] F. Xu, Z. Sun, T. Jia, C. Liu, C. Xu, C. Li, Y. Gu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, B. Tong, J. Jia, Z. Shi, S. Jiang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, and T. Li, Observation of Integer and Fractional Quantum Anomalous Hall Effects in Twisted Bilayer mote2, [Physical Review X](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.13.031037) 13, 031037 [\(2023\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.13.031037)
- <span id="page-15-3"></span>[5] D. Sheng, Z.-C. Gu, K. Sun, and L. Sheng, Fractional quantum hall effect in the absence of landau levels, [Nature communications](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1380) 2, 389 [\(2011\).](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1380)
- <span id="page-15-25"></span>[6] N. Regnault and B. A. Bernevig, Fractional chern insulator, [Physical Review X](https://journals.aps.org/prx/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevX.1.021014) 1, 021014 (2011).
- [7] T. Neupert, L. Santos, C. Chamon, and C. Mudry, Fractional quantum hall states at zero magnetic field, [Physical review letters](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.236804) 106, [236804 \(2011\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.236804)
- [8] E. Tang, J.-W. Mei, and X.-G. Wen, High-temperature fractional quantum hall states, Physical review letters 106, 236802 (2011).
- <span id="page-15-4"></span>[9] K. Sun, Z. Gu, H. Katsura, and S. D. Sarma, Nearly flatbands with nontrivial topology, Physical review letters 106, 236803 (2011).
- <span id="page-15-5"></span>[10] F. Wu, T. Lovorn, E. Tutuc, I. Martin, and A. MacDonald, Topological insulators in twisted transition metal dichalcogenide homobilayers, [Physical review letters](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.086402) 122, 086402 (2019).
- [11] H. Li, U. Kumar, K. Sun, and S.-Z. Lin, Spontaneous fractional chern insulators in transition metal dichalcogenide moire superlattices, ´ [Physical Review Research](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.L032070) 3, L032070 (2021).
- <span id="page-15-7"></span>[12] A. P. Reddy, F. Alsallom, Y. Zhang, T. Devakul, and L. Fu, Fractional quantum anomalous hall states in twisted bilayer mote<sup>2</sup> and wse2, Phys. Rev. B 108[, 085117 \(2023\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.108.085117)
- <span id="page-15-24"></span>[13] V. Crepel and L. Fu, Anomalous hall metal and fractional chern insulator in twisted transition metal dichalcogenides, ´ [Physical Review B](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.107.L201109) 107[, L201109 \(2023\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.107.L201109)
- [14] N. Morales-Duran, N. Wei, and A. H. MacDonald, Magic angles and fractional chern insulators in twisted homobilayer tmds, ´ [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03143) [preprint arXiv:2308.03143 \(2023\).](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03143)
- [15] C. Wang, X.-W. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. He, X. Xu, Y. Ran, T. Cao, and D. Xiao, Fractional chern insulator in twisted bilayer mote2, [Physical](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.132.036501) Review Letters 132[, 036501 \(2024\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.132.036501)
- [16] W.-X. Qiu, B. Li, X.-J. Luo, and F. Wu, Interaction-driven topological phase diagram of twisted bilayer mote2, [Phys. Rev. X](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.13.041026) 13, 041026 [\(2023\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.13.041026)
- <span id="page-15-21"></span>[17] J. Yu, J. Herzog-Arbeitman, M. Wang, O. Vafek, B. A. Bernevig, and N. Regnault, Fractional chern insulators vs. non-magnetic states in twisted bilayer mote2, [Physical Review B](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.109.045147) 109, 045147 (2024).
- <span id="page-15-22"></span>[18] Y. Jia, J. Yu, J. Liu, J. Herzog-Arbeitman, Z. Qi, N. Regnault, H. Weng, B. A. Bernevig, and Q. Wu, Moire fractional chern insulators i: ´ First-principles calculations and continuum models of twisted bilayer mote<sup>2</sup> (2023), [arXiv:2311.04958.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04958)
- <span id="page-15-8"></span>[19] A. P. Reddy and L. Fu, Toward a global phase diagram of the fractional quantum anomalous hall effect, Phys. Rev. B 108[, 245159 \(2023\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.108.245159)
- <span id="page-15-6"></span>[20] X.-W. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Fan, T. Cao, and D. Xiao, Polarization-driven band topology evolution in twisted mote<sup>2</sup> and wse<sup>2</sup> (2024), [arXiv:2311.12776 \[cond-mat.mtrl-sci\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12776)
- <span id="page-15-9"></span>[21] J. Wang, J. Cano, A. J. Millis, Z. Liu, and B. Yang, Exact landau level description of geometry and interaction in a flatband, Physical review letters 127, 246403 (2021).
- <span id="page-15-10"></span>[22] T. Ozawa and B. Mera, Relations between topology and the quantum metric for chern insulators, [Physical Review B](http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.104.045103) 104 (2021).
- <span id="page-15-11"></span>[23] M. Fujimoto, D. E. Parker, J. Dong, E. Khalaf, A. Vishwanath, and P. Ledwith, Higher vortexability: zero field realization of higher landau levels (2024), [arXiv:2403.00856 \[cond-mat.mes-hall\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00856)
- <span id="page-15-26"></span>[24] A. P. Reddy, N. Paul, A. Abouelkomsan, and L. Fu, Non-abelian fractionalization in topological minibands (2024), [arXiv:2403.00059](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00059) [\[cond-mat.mes-hall\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00059)
- <span id="page-15-23"></span>[25] C. Xu, N. Mao, T. Zeng, and Y. Zhang, Multiple chern bands in twisted mote<sup>2</sup> and possible non-abelian states (2024), [arXiv:2403.17003](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.17003) [\[cond-mat.str-el\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.17003)
- <span id="page-15-20"></span>[26] C.-E. Ahn, W. Lee, K. Yananose, Y. Kim, and G. Y. Cho, First landau level physics in second moire band of ´ 2.1 ◦ twisted bilayer mote<sup>2</sup> (2024), [arXiv:2403.19155 \[cond-mat.str-el\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19155)
- <span id="page-15-12"></span>[27] C. Wang, X.-W. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Wang, T. Cao, and D. Xiao, Higher landau-level analogues and signatures of non-abelian states in twisted bilayer mote<sup>2</sup> (2024), [arXiv:2404.05697 \[cond-mat.str-el\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05697)
- <span id="page-15-13"></span>[28] K. Kang, B. Shen, Y. Qiu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Shan, and K. F. Mak, Observation of the fractional quantum spin Hall effect in moire MoTe2, ´ Nature 628[, 522 \(2024\).](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07214-5)
- <span id="page-15-15"></span>[29] C.-M. Jian, M. Cheng, and C. Xu, Minimal Fractional Topological Insulator in half-filled conjugate moire Chern bands, ´ [arXiv e-prints ,](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.07054) [arXiv:2403.07054 \(2024\),](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.07054) [arXiv:2403.07054 \[cond-mat.str-el\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07054)
- [30] Y.-H. Zhang, Vortex spin liquid with fractional quantum spin Hall effect in moire Chern bands, arXiv e-prints ´ [10.48550/arXiv.2402.05112](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.05112) (2024).
- <span id="page-15-16"></span>[31] I. S. Villadiego, Halperin states of particles and holes in ideal time reversal invariant pairs of chern bands and the fractional quantum spin hall effect in moire mote ´ <sup>2</sup> (2024), [arXiv:2403.12185 \[cond-mat.mes-hall\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12185)
- <span id="page-15-17"></span>[32] G. Moore and N. Read, Nonabelions in the fractional quantum hall effect, [Nuclear Physics B](https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(91)90407-O) 360, 362 (1991).
- <span id="page-15-18"></span>[33] M. Greiter, X.-G. Wen, and F. Wilczek, Paired hall state at half filling, [Phys. Rev. Lett.](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.66.3205) 66, 3205 (1991).
- <span id="page-15-19"></span>[34] S.-S. Lee, S. Ryu, C. Nayak, and M. P. A. Fisher, Particle-hole symmetry and the ν = 5 2 quantum hall state, [Phys. Rev. Lett.](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.236807) 99, 236807 [\(2007\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.236807)

- <span id="page-16-0"></span>[35] M. Levin, B. I. Halperin, and B. Rosenow, Particle-hole symmetry and the pfaffian state, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99[, 236806 \(2007\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.236806)
- <span id="page-16-1"></span>[36] P. T. Zucker and D. E. Feldman, Stabilization of the particle-hole pfaffian order by landau-level mixing and impurities that break particlehole symmetry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117[, 096802 \(2016\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.117.096802)
- <span id="page-16-2"></span>[37] M. Banerjee, M. Heiblum, V. Umansky, D. E. Feldman, Y. Oreg, and A. Stern, Observation of half-integer thermal hall conductance, Nature 559[, 205 \(2018\).](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0184-1)
- [38] D. F. Mross, Y. Oreg, A. Stern, G. Margalit, and M. Heiblum, Theory of disorder-induced half-integer thermal hall conductance, [Phys.](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.026801) Rev. Lett. 121[, 026801 \(2018\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.026801)
- [39] S. H. Simon, Interpretation of thermal conductance of the ν = 5/2 edge, Phys. Rev. B 97[, 121406 \(2018\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.97.121406)
- <span id="page-16-3"></span>[40] S. H. Simon, M. Ippoliti, M. P. Zaletel, and E. H. Rezayi, Energetics of pfaffian–anti-pfaffian domains, Phys. Rev. B 101[, 041302 \(2020\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.101.041302)
- <span id="page-16-4"></span>[41] A. Kol and N. Read, Fractional quantum hall effect in a periodic potential, Phys. Rev. B 48[, 8890 \(1993\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.48.8890)
- <span id="page-16-10"></span>[42] B. A. Bernevig and N. Regnault, Emergent many-body translational symmetries of abelian and non-abelian fractionally filled topological insulators, Phys. Rev. B 85[, 075128 \(2012\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.075128)
- <span id="page-16-5"></span>[43] D. N. Sheng, A. P. Reddy, A. Abouelkomsan, E. J. Bergholtz, and L. Fu, Quantum anomalous hall crystal at fractional filling of moire´ superlattices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 133[, 066601 \(2024\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.133.066601)
- <span id="page-16-6"></span>[44] N. Mao, C. Xu, J. Li, T. Bao, P. Liu, Y. Xu, C. Felser, L. Fu, and Y. Zhang, Lattice relaxation, electronic structure and continuum model for twisted bilayer mote<sup>2</sup> (2023), [arXiv:2311.07533 \[cond-mat.str-el\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07533)
- <span id="page-16-7"></span>[45] For simplicity, we neglect an overall negative sign of chern numbers for all bands due to spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking.
- <span id="page-16-8"></span>[46] R. Roy, Band geometry of fractional topological insulators, Phys. Rev. B 90[, 165139 \(2014\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.90.165139)
- <span id="page-16-9"></span>[47] See supplementary materials for more supporting data.
- <span id="page-16-11"></span>[48] S. M. Girvin, A. H. MacDonald, and P. M. Platzman, Magneto-roton theory of collective excitations in the fractional quantum hall effect, Phys. Rev. B 33[, 2481 \(1986\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.33.2481)
- <span id="page-16-12"></span>[49] Q. Niu, D. J. Thouless, and Y.-S. Wu, Quantized hall conductance as a topological invariant, Phys. Rev. B 31[, 3372 \(1985\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.31.3372)
- <span id="page-16-13"></span>[50] D. N. Sheng, X. Wan, E. H. Rezayi, K. Yang, R. N. Bhatt, and F. D. M. Haldane, Disorder-driven collapse of the mobility gap and transition to an insulator in the fractional quantum hall effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90[, 256802 \(2003\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.256802)
- <span id="page-16-14"></span>[51] T. Fukui, Y. Hatsugai, and H. Suzuki, Chern numbers in discretized brillouin zone: Efficient method of computing (spin) hall conductances, [Journal of the Physical Society of Japan](https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.74.1674) 74, 1674 (2005), [https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.74.1674.](https://arxiv.org/abs/https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.74.1674)
- <span id="page-16-15"></span>[52] Y.-F. Wang, Z.-C. Gu, C.-D. Gong, and D. N. Sheng, Fractional quantum hall effect of hard-core bosons in topological flat bands, [Phys.](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.146803) Rev. Lett. 107[, 146803 \(2011\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.146803)
- <span id="page-16-16"></span>[53] A. Sterdyniak, N. Regnault, and B. A. Bernevig, Extracting excitations from model state entanglement, [Phys. Rev. Lett.](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.100405) 106, 100405 [\(2011\).](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.100405)
- <span id="page-16-17"></span>[54] Z. Liu, B. Mera, M. Fujimoto, T. Ozawa, and J. Wang, Theory of generalized landau levels and implication for non-abelian states (2024), [arXiv:2405.14479 \[cond-mat.mes-hall\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14479)
- <span id="page-16-18"></span>[55] A. Abouelkomsan and L. Fu, [Non-abelian spin hall insulator](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14617) (2024), [arXiv:2406.14617 \[cond-mat.mes-hall\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14617)
- <span id="page-16-19"></span>[56] H. Liu, Z. Liu, and E. J. Bergholtz, Non-abelian fractional chern insulators and competing states in flat moire bands (2024), ´ [arXiv:2405.08887 \[cond-mat.str-el\].](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.08887)