# Intermediate symmetric construction of transformation between anyon and Gentile statistics

Yao Shen<sup>∗</sup>

School of Criminal Investigation and Forensic Science, People's Public Security University of China, Beijing 100038, PR China

E-mail:<shenyaophysics@hotmail.com>

#### Abstract

Gentile statistics describes fractional statistical systems in the occupation number representation. Anyon statistics researches those systems in the winding number representation. Both of them are intermediate statistics between Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics. The second quantization of Gentile statistics shows a lot of advantages. According to the symmetry requirement of the wave function, we give the general construction of transformation between anyon and Gentile statistics. In other words, we introduce the second quantization form of anyons in a easy way. Basic relations of second quantization operators, the coherent state and Berry phase are also discussed.

# Introduction

In nature, basic particles are divided into two categories: bosons and fermions. Bosons obey Bose-Einstein statistics. Fermions follow Fermi-Dirac statistics. The symmetry requests the wave functions of bosons are symmetric, while they are anti-symmetric for fermions. Regarding many body system, when we exchange two bosons, the wave function is invariant. When two fermions are exchanged, the wave function of the many body system gets a phase π (−1).There could be only one fermion in single quantum state at most, while the number of boson in one state is not limited. In these decades, researchers found some intermediate cases between Bose and Fermi statistics called intermediate statistics or fractional statistics. Anyon and Gentile statistics are two typical and important cases. Wilczek pointed out that braiding two different anyons gave the wave function an additional phase 2πkα, where k is the winding number and α is statistical parameter[1](#page-9-0)[–8](#page-10-0) . α could be fraction and depends on the type of anyon. For example, according to the first Kitaev model (1/2 anyon )[9](#page-10-1)[,10](#page-10-2) , anyon has four superselection sectors: e (electric charge), m (magnetic vortex), ε = e × m and vacuum. Moving an anyon around another which belongs to a different superselection sector except vacuum gives the wave function the phase π (−1). Gentile named a special

statistics after his name in 1940[11](#page-10-3)[–14](#page-10-4). The maximum occupation number of Gentile statistics is limited to a finite number n [15](#page-10-5)[,16](#page-10-6). Because of these properties, the representations of anyon and Gentile statistics are called the winding number representation and the occupation number representation. They describe intermediate statistics in different aspects. One of the correspondences between these two representations has been discussed in reference[17](#page-10-7) . That is a special algebra we constructed in 2010. More and more real anyon systems and Gentile systems are observed these decades[18](#page-10-8)[–25](#page-11-0) .

It has to be noticed that the wave function is also invariant when one fermion goes around another. In another word, the wave function of fermion goes back to itself for one circle. Exchanging two particles is half a circle which gives fermion the phase factor −1 . Bosons and fermions must be the ultimate limits of anyons and Gentile particles. As for 1/2 anyon, one circle corresponds to additional phase factor −1, and half circle is a complex number i. In quantum mechanics, all quantities can be observed are real. This limitation is inconvenient. Fortunately, the group of anyon is braiding group. Therefore, it's advisable that we can weaken the limitation of fermionic symmetry to give a general construction of transformation between anyon and Gentile statistics. In this case, the limits of anyons and Gentile particles are bosons and fermions after adjustment.

This paper is organized as following: In section II, we construct a general form of transformation between anyon and Gentile statistics. In section III, we give the results of the second quantization operators of anyons in the winding number representation. In section IV and V, the coherent state and Berry phase of anyon are discussed respectively. Finally, in section VI, the main results are concluded and further work is discussed.

# The construction of transformation between two representations

Gentile and anyon statistics are both intermediate statistics. The maximum occupation number of Gentile particles in one state is a finite number n. The state of Gentile statistics is represented to be  $|\nu\rangle_n$ , where  $\nu$  is the practical particle number in one state. Thus the representation of Gentile statistics is called the occupation number representation.  $n \to \infty$ and n=1 correspond to Bose and Fermi statistics. It is very convenient to describe systems in the occupation number representation. After the second quantization, the basic operator relation is  $\left[b,a^{\dagger}\right]_n=ba^{\dagger}-e^{i2\pi/(n+1)}a^{\dagger}b=1$ , where  $a,\,b,\,a^{\dagger},\,b^{\dagger}$  are annihilation and creation operators of Gentile system and  $a = b^*$ . This relation tells us that there will be a phase factor  $e^{i2\pi/(n+1)}$  when two Gentile particles are exchanged . With regard to anyon, two different anyons braid for one circle gives the phase factor  $e^{i2\pi k\alpha}$ . We want to relate these two phase factors to each other. At the same time, bosons and fermions are their limits. This is quite natural for bosons. As we mentioned above, there is a problem for fermions. Braiding two fermions for one circle gives the wave function nothing while exchanging them gives -1. If we follow this requirement strictly, for example, exchanging two different 1/2 anyons will create a complex number i. However, the difficulty lies in complex number couldn't be observed in quantum mechanics. Considering these, we have to weaken the limitation of symmetry. Because of the braiding group of anyons, we assume that the wave functions of anyons go back to themselves after braiding them for q circles. Our basic assumption goes to

<span id="page-3-1"></span>
$$\alpha = \frac{1}{ng}, k = \frac{\nu g}{2}.\tag{1}$$

 $\nu$  is the practical particle number in one state and  $\nu \in N$ . So we have the change of the winding number  $\delta k = g/2$ . The relation of two phase factors between two representations is

<span id="page-3-0"></span>
$$e^{i2\pi k\alpha} = \left(e^{\frac{i2\pi\nu}{n+1}}\right)^{\frac{n+1}{2n}},\tag{2}$$

or

<span id="page-4-0"></span>
$$e^{\frac{i2\pi\nu}{n+1}} = \left(e^{i2\pi k\alpha}\right)^{\frac{2}{1+\alpha g}}.\tag{3}$$

In Bose case,  $n \to \infty$ ,  $\Rightarrow \alpha = 0$ ,  $k = (\nu g)/2$ . Equations (2) and (3) are satisfied automatically. As for Fermi case n = 1, we have  $\alpha = 1/g$  and k = 0 ( $\nu = 0$ ) or k = g/2 ( $\nu = 1$ ). There is no question when k = 0 ( $\nu = 0$ ). When k = g/2 ( $\nu = 1$ ), both sides of equation (2) equal to -1. In other words, this construction of transformation is successful in its ultimate limits: bosons and fermions. What calls for special attention is that reference  $^{17}$  is another example of g = 2 (but reference  $^{17}$  shows a little difference). In reference  $^{17}$ ,  $\alpha = 1/(n+1)$  and  $k = \nu$  ( $k \in N$ ). It is a different construction from this paper. Here we have  $\alpha = 1/(2n)$  and  $k = \nu$  ( $k \in Q_+$ ). Both of these two constructions are right, because the construction of transformation is not unique, as long as they satisfy the symmetry requirement and self-consistent.

# Basic relations of the second quantization operators

The second quantization form has the advantage in describing the creation and annihilation of particles. In this part, we transform the basic relations of the second quantization operators in the occupation number representation to the winding number representation to give anyon another description.

According to equations (1) and (3), the main operator relation becomes

<span id="page-4-1"></span>
$$[b, a^{\dagger}]_{\alpha, q} = ba^{\dagger} - \left(e^{i\pi\alpha g}\right)^{\frac{2}{1+\alpha g}} a^{\dagger} b = 1. \tag{4}$$

The states in the occupation number representation are  $|\nu\rangle_n$ . In the winding number representation, the states can be expressed as

$$|k,g\rangle_{\alpha} \equiv \left|\frac{2k}{g}\right\rangle_{\alpha,g} = |\nu\rangle_{n} \,.$$
 (5)

And the variations of the practical occupation number and the winding number are  $\delta\nu=1$ ,  $\delta k=g/2$  which means  $\nu=0,1,2\cdots n$  and  $k=0,g/2,g\cdots (ng)/2$ . To create and annihilate a particle, we have

$$a^{\dagger} |k,g\rangle_{\alpha} = \sqrt{\left\langle k + \frac{g}{2}, g \right\rangle_{\alpha}} \left| k + \frac{g}{2}, g \right\rangle_{\alpha},$$
 (6)

$$b|k,g\rangle_{\alpha} = \sqrt{\langle k,g\rangle_{\alpha}} \left|k - \frac{g}{2},g\rangle_{\alpha},$$
 (7)

where

$$\langle k, g \rangle_{\alpha} \equiv \left\langle \frac{2k}{g} \right\rangle_{\alpha, g} = \frac{1 - \left(e^{i2\pi k\alpha}\right)^{\frac{2}{1+\alpha g}}}{1 - \left(e^{i\pi\alpha g}\right)^{\frac{2}{1+\alpha g}}}.$$
 (8)

 $a^{\dagger}$  creates a particle each time and b annihilates one. And

$$|k,g\rangle_{\alpha} = \frac{\left(a^{\dagger}\right)^{\frac{2k}{g}}}{\sqrt{\prod\limits_{p=g/2}^{k} \langle p,g\rangle_{\alpha}}} |0,g\rangle_{\alpha} = \frac{\left(b^{\dagger}\right)^{\frac{2k}{g}}}{\sqrt{\prod\limits_{p=g/2}^{k} \langle p,g\rangle_{\alpha}^{*}}} |0,g\rangle_{\alpha}. \tag{9}$$

We also construct the particle number operator N as

$$N = \frac{1 + \alpha g}{2\pi \alpha g} \arccos \left[ \frac{1}{2} \left( B + B^{\dagger} \right) \right], \tag{10}$$

where

$$B \equiv ba^{\dagger} - a^{\dagger}b,\tag{11}$$

Now, Let us consider the more general operator relations for arbitrary operators:  $u, v, w \cdots$ . The intermediate statistical bracket -n bracket is substituted by  $[u, v]_{\alpha,g}$  (see equation (4)). We give the famous Jacobi-like identities as examples,

$$\begin{bmatrix} [u,v]_{\alpha,g},w \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} + \begin{bmatrix} [w,u]_{\alpha,g},v \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} + \begin{bmatrix} [v,w]_{\alpha,g},u \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} 
+ \begin{bmatrix} [v,u]_{\alpha,g},w \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} + \begin{bmatrix} [u,w]_{\alpha,g},v \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} + \begin{bmatrix} [w,v]_{\alpha,g},u \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} 
= \left(1 - e^{\frac{i2\pi\alpha g}{1+\alpha g}}\right)^2 (uvw + wuv + vwu + vuw + uwv + wvu),$$
(12)

$$\begin{bmatrix} [u,v]_{\alpha,g},w \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} + \begin{bmatrix} [w,u]_{\alpha,g},v \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} + \begin{bmatrix} [v,w]_{\alpha,g},u \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} 
- \begin{bmatrix} [v,u]_{\alpha,g},w \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} - \begin{bmatrix} [u,w]_{\alpha,g},v \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} - \begin{bmatrix} [w,v]_{\alpha,g},u \end{bmatrix}_{\alpha,g} 
= \left(1 - e^{\frac{i4\pi\alpha g}{1+\alpha g}}\right) (uvw + wuv + vwu - vuw - uwv - wvu).$$
(13)

#### The coherent states

The eigenstate of annihilation operator is called the coherent state  $^{26}$ . The coherent state of harmonic oscillator is very important in physics. In Gentile statistics, the coherent state is the eigenstate of annihilation operator b. In our construction, the coherent state is expressed as  $|\chi\rangle_{\alpha,g}$  in the winding number representation, so we have another expression:

$$b |\chi\rangle_{\alpha,q} = \chi |\chi\rangle_{\alpha,q},$$
 (14)

where the eigenvalue  $\chi$  is a Grassmann number. Grassmann numbers don't commute with the states. They satisfy

$$\chi |k, g\rangle_{\alpha} = \lambda_{\alpha}(k, g) |k, g\rangle_{\alpha} \chi,$$
 (15)

here we take

$$\lambda_{\alpha}(k,g) \equiv \left(e^{\pm i2\pi k\alpha}\right)^{\frac{2}{1+\alpha g}},\tag{16}$$

as an example and we also have

$$\chi^{\frac{1+\alpha g}{\alpha g}} = 0. \tag{17}$$

Under these assumptions, we can construct the coherent state as

$$|\chi\rangle_{\alpha,g} = M \sum_{k=0}^{\frac{1}{2\alpha}} \gamma_{\alpha}(k,g) |k,g\rangle_{\alpha} \chi^{\frac{2k}{g}}, \tag{18}$$

where M is the normalization constant, the coefficients read

$$\gamma_{\alpha}(k,g) = \prod_{p=0}^{k-g/2} \frac{e^{\pm \frac{i4\pi p\alpha}{1+\alpha g}}}{\sqrt{\langle p, g \rangle_{\alpha}}},$$
(19)

and both the variations  $\delta k = \delta p = g/2$ . In this case, the state in adjoint space is

$$\left\langle \chi \right|_{\alpha,g} = M \sum_{k=0}^{\frac{1}{2\alpha}} \gamma_{\alpha}^{*} \left( k, g \right) \bar{\chi}^{\frac{2k}{g}} \left\langle k, g \right|_{\alpha}, \tag{20}$$

where  $\bar{\chi}$  is also the Grassmann number in adjoint space. Under the normalization condition  $\langle \chi | \chi \rangle_{\alpha,q} = 1$ , we have

$$M = \left[ 1 + \sum_{l=g/2}^{\frac{1}{2\alpha}} (\bar{\chi}\chi)^{\frac{2l}{g}} |\gamma_{\alpha}(l,g)|^{2} \right]^{-\frac{1}{2}}, \tag{21}$$

and also the variation  $\delta l = g/2$ . Moreover, the relations of the Grassmann number and creation and annihilation operators can be obtained:

$$\chi \left(a^{\dagger}\right)^{\frac{2k}{g}} = \left(e^{\pm i2\pi k\alpha}\right)^{\frac{2}{1+\alpha g}} \left(a^{\dagger}\right)^{\frac{2k}{g}} \chi,\tag{22}$$

$$a^{\frac{2k}{g}}\chi = \left(e^{\pm i2\pi k\alpha}\right)^{\frac{2}{1+\alpha g}}\chi a^{\frac{2k}{g}}.$$
 (23)

As for  $b^{\dagger}$ , b, there will be the same relations.

### Berry phase

Berry phase is a very important concept in differential geometry. The appearance of Berry phase is a topological effect. The source is that the spherical surface is not homeomorphic to plane. Under an adiabatic and unitary transformation, the eigenstate of Gentile system could obtain a phase factor  $exp(i\eta_{\nu})$  where  $\eta_{\nu}$  is an angle which depends on the practical particle number, and this factor is Berry phase. We assume the unitary transformation is denoted by

 $U(\theta)$ , where  $\theta$  is some kind of angle. Operator A under this unitary transformation become  $U(\theta) A U^{\dagger}(\theta)$ . In the occupation number representation of Gentile statistics, we adopt

$$U\left(\theta\right) = e^{-i\theta J_z},\tag{24}$$

and  $J_z = N = n/2$ . We have

<span id="page-8-0"></span>
$$\eta_{\nu} = i \oint \langle \nu | U^{\dagger}(\theta) \nabla_{\theta} U(\theta) | \nu \rangle_{n} = 2\pi (\nu - \frac{n}{2}). \tag{25}$$

According to equation (1), we relate  $exp(i\eta_{\nu})$  to the phase factor of anyon in the winding number representation, equation (25) becomes

<span id="page-8-1"></span>
$$\eta_{\nu} = 2\pi \left(\frac{2k}{g} - \frac{1}{2\alpha g}\right). \tag{26}$$

The positive and negative value of  $\eta_{\nu}$  correspond to two closed trajectories in two opposite directions.

To show the non-uniqueness of the construction, here we introduce another instruction, suppose  $\alpha = 1/(ng)$  and

<span id="page-8-2"></span>
$$e^{i\eta_{\nu}} = e^{i2\pi k\alpha}. (27)$$

Then we get a restrict of the winding number

$$k = \frac{\nu}{\alpha} - \frac{1}{2\alpha g}. (28)$$

The positive and negative value of k means braiding clockwise and counterclockwise. For instance, when n=3 and g=2, we have  $\nu=0,1,2,3$  and  $\alpha=1/6$ . So the restrict of k is  $k=6\nu-9=-9,-3,3,9$ . The difference is that equation (26) is a direct usage of equation (1), and equation (27) forces those two phase factors equal to each other to give a restrict of the winding number.

# Conclusion and discussion

Anyon and Gentile statistics are two typical intermediate statistics beyond Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics. Bose and Fermi statistics are their ultimate limit conditions. When two different kinds of anyons are braiding, the wave function of the system could obtain an additional phase factor which depends on the statistical parameter and the winding number. The maximum occupation number of Gentile statistics is neither 1 nor ∞, but a finite number n. After the second quantization, exchanging two Gentile particles also gives the wave function a phase factor which depends on n. The second quantization form is very convenient to create, annihilate particles and gives special properties of the system. So it is worth researching the second quantization form of anyons. But this is not easy and the symmetry requirement must be weakened to make the construction self-consistent. In this paper, we introduce a general construction of transformation between anyon and Gentile statistics to change the results of Gentile statistics in the winding number representation of anyons. In other words, we give the second quantization form of anyons indirectly. The coherent state and Berry phase are also discussed. Further researches of anyon properties are proceeding.

# Acknowledgment

The research was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities No.2020JKF306.

# References

- <span id="page-9-0"></span>(1) F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 957 (1982).
- (2) F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1144 (1982).

- (3) F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1146 (1982).
- (4) S. Levit, and N. Sivan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 363 (1992).
- (5) A. Lerda (Ed.), Anyons-Quantum Mechanics of Particles with Fractional Statistics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1992) and references therein.
- (6) A. Comtet, S.N. Majumdar, and S. Ouvry, J. Phys. A 40, 11255 (2007).
- (7) S. Mashkevich, S. Matveenko, and S. Ouvry, Nuclear Phys. B 763, 431 (2007).
- <span id="page-10-0"></span>(8) A. Rovenchak, Low Temp. Phys. 35, 400 (2009).
- <span id="page-10-1"></span>(9) A.Y. Kitaev, Ann. Phys. 303, 2 (2003).
- <span id="page-10-2"></span>(10) A. Kitaev, Ann. Phys. 321, 2 (2006).
- <span id="page-10-3"></span>(11) G. Gentile, Nuovo Cimento 17, 493 (1940).
- (12) A. Khare, Fractional Statistics and Quantum Theory (World Scientific, Singapore, 1997).
- (13) R. Hernandez-Perez, and D. Tun, Physica A 384, 297304 (2007).
- <span id="page-10-4"></span>(14) W.S. Dai, and M. Xie, J. Stat. Mech. P07034 (2009).
- <span id="page-10-5"></span>(15) Y. Shen, W.S. Dai, and M. Xie, Phys. Rev. A 75, 042111 (2007).
- <span id="page-10-6"></span>(16) W.S. Dai, and M. Xie, Physica A 331, 497(2004).
- <span id="page-10-7"></span>(17) Y. Shen, Q. Ai, and G. L. Long. Physica A. 389, 1565-1570 (2010).
- <span id="page-10-8"></span>(18) Y. Shen, and Y. L. Zhao. J. Phys. Chem. A. 122, 6349−6353 (2018).
- (19) W.S. Dai, and M. Xie, J. Stat. Mech. P04021 (2009).
- (20) B. DeMarco, and D.S. Jin, Science 285, 1703 (1999).

- (21) A.G. Truscott, K.E. Strecker, W.I. McAlexander, G.B. Partridge, and R.G. Hulet, Science 291, 2570 (2001).
- (22) F. Schreck, L. Khaykovich, K.L. Corwin, G. Ferrari, T. Bourdel, J. Cubizolles, and C. Salomon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 080403 (2001).
- (23) F. Wilczek (Ed.), Fractional Statistics and Anyon Superconductivity (World Scientific, Singapore, 1990) and references therein.
- (24) Z.N.C. Ha, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1574 (1994).
- <span id="page-11-0"></span>(25) B. Sutherland, Phys. Rev. B 56, 4422(1997).
- <span id="page-11-1"></span>(26) J.R. Klauder, and B.-S. Skagerstam, Coherent States, Applications in Physics and Mathematical Physics (World Scientific, Singapore, 1985).