# <span id="page-0-0"></span>Snowmass White Paper: Generalized Symmetries in Quantum Field Theory and Beyond

Clay Cordova ´ 1\*, Thomas T. Dumitrescu2† , Kenneth Intriligator3‡ , Shu-Heng Shao4§ <sup>1</sup>Enrico Fermi Institute and Kadanoff Center for Theoretical Physics, University of Chicago <sup>2</sup>Mani L. Bhaumik Institute for Theoretical Physics, UCLA <sup>3</sup>Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego <sup>4</sup>C.N. Yang Institute for Theoretical Physics, Stony Brook University

#### Abstract

Symmetry plays a central role in quantum field theory. Recent developments include symmetries that act on defects and other subsystems, and symmetries that are categorical rather than group-like. These generalized notions of symmetry allow for new kinds of anomalies that constrain dynamics. We review some transformative instances of these novel aspects of symmetry in quantum field theory, and give a broad-brush overview of recent applications.

#### May 2022

\*e-mail: clayc@uchicago.edu

† e-mail: tdumitrecu@physics.ucla.edu

‡ e-mail: keni@ucsd.edu

§ e-mail: shu-heng.shao@stonybrook.edu

## Contents

| 1 | Introduction<br>From Ordinary to Generalized Symmetries |                                   |        |  |  |  |
|---|---------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------|--|--|--|
| 2 |                                                         |                                   |        |  |  |  |
|   | 2.1                                                     | Ordinary Symmetries<br>           | 2<br>2 |  |  |  |
|   | 2.2                                                     | Higher Form Symmetries            | 3      |  |  |  |
|   | 2.3                                                     | Higher Group Symmetries<br>       | 5      |  |  |  |
|   | 2.4                                                     | Non-Invertible Symmetries         | 6      |  |  |  |
|   | 2.5                                                     | Subsystem Symmetries and Fractons | 6      |  |  |  |
| 3 | Anomalies and Dynamical Consequences of Symmetry        |                                   |        |  |  |  |
|   | 3.1                                                     | Anomalies and Anomaly Matching    | 8<br>8 |  |  |  |
|   | 3.2                                                     | Applications to QFT Dynamics      | 9      |  |  |  |

## <span id="page-1-0"></span>1 Introduction

Symmetry has long been a transformative, development-guiding notion in physics. Examples include Noether's theorems [\[1,](#page-10-0) [2\]](#page-10-1) connecting symmetries and conservation laws, and Landau's symmetry-based theory of phase transitions [\[3\]](#page-10-2).[1](#page-0-0) Transitions between quantum states are constrained by the Wigner-Eckart theorem, which applies to quantum systems whose Hamiltonian is invariant under a symmetry group. Here we will discuss symmetry in the context of quantum field theory (QFT), where additional structures such as locality or Lorentz invariance lead to a rich set of refinements and generalizations of the notion of symmetry. The resulting generalized symmetries can act on lower-dimensional defects and subsystems within the QFT, and their properties are in general captured by higher categories rather than by groups.

Given that symmetry is such a vast subject, this overview will necessarily be an incomplete sketch of a few recent, selected lines of development, with many omissions. As advertised we primarily focus on symmetries in QFT, with emphasis on renormalization group (RG) flows and anomalies. The later are intimately related to the possibility of projectively realizing symmetries in quantum theory. For a different recent survey from a condensed matter perspective, see for instance [\[4\]](#page-10-3).

The fundamental forces are described via local gauge interactions. In that context, gauge invariance reflects a convenient but unphysical redundancy introduced to satisfy the requirements of locality and Lorentz invariance in relativistic QFT; as such it is exact, but has no observable consequences, e.g. it can famously not be spontaneously broken [\[5\]](#page-10-4).

By contrast, global symmetries imply relations between observable physical quantities; as such they may be spontaneously broken, and they are useful even if only approximate. Examples include the approximate unbroken *SU*(3)flavor and *SU*(2)isospin symmetries of QCD, as well as the approximate discrete symmetries *C* and *P*. QCD spontaneously breaks its approximate chiral quark flavor symmetries; the pions are the associated (pseudo-) Nambu-Goldstone bosons (NGBs). Such considerations led to the discovery of the Adler-Bell-Jackiw (ABJ) anomaly [\[6,](#page-10-5) [7\]](#page-10-6) [2](#page-0-0) and the closely related explicit violation of ABJ-anomalous symmetries by instantons [\[10\]](#page-10-7).[3](#page-0-0) Global symmetries can powerfully constrain QFT dynamics, even in strongly coupled theories. 't Hooft noted in [\[12\]](#page-10-8) that anomalies involving only global currents (unlike the ABJ case) are obstructions to gauging and they must be constant on renormalization group (RG) flows; such anomalies are often now often referred to as *'t Hooft anomalies* and will be reviewed here.

<sup>1</sup> This paper is one of Landau's famous contributions during his tenure at the Ukrainian Physico-Technical Institute in Kharkiv.

<sup>2</sup> It was recently pointed out that the ABJ anomaly actually leads to non-invertible global symmetries [\[8,](#page-10-9) [9\]](#page-10-10).

<sup>3</sup> See [\[11\]](#page-10-11) for an influential account of symmetry in the development of QFT.

Global symmetries are termed accidental (or emergent) when they arise or enhance in the deep IR and violated by higher dimension operators. Examples are  $U(1)_B$  baryon and  $U(1)_L$  lepton number, which are preserved by the dimension 4 operators of the Standard Model (SM) but are violated by higher dimension operators (as well as by electroweak instantons).<sup>4</sup> All global symmetries are expected to be accidental in quantum gravity, see for instance the recent review [13] and references therein.

There have been many attempts to generalize global symmetries in relativistic QFT, e.g. by combining internal and Lorentz symmetries, or by contemplating conserved currents of higher spin  $s \ge 3.5$  The latter famously arise in the context of integrable QFTs in d=2 spacetime dimensions, as in [14]. For d>2, the Coleman-Mandula (CM) theorem [15] implies that higher spin conserved currents essentially render the theory free.

There are two interesting, broad classes of exceptions to the CM theorem: conformal field theories, where the Poincaré group is extended to the conformal group SO(d,2), and supersymmetric field theories [17]; these two classes intersect in the superconformal theories [18]. We will not specifically focus on these classes of theories here; they are covered in other Snowmass white papers (see e.g. [19,20]). Instead, we will survey other large classes of generalized symmetries that are not ruled out by the CM-theorem and that require neither conformal symmetry nor supersymmetry (though they do occur in conformal and supersymmetric theories).

The remainder of this white paper is organized as follows:

In section 2 we review basic aspects of ordinary symmetries (section 2.1) before surveying four kinds of generalized global symmetries: higher form symmetries (section 2.2), higher group symmetries (section 2.3), non-invertible symmetries (section 2.4) and subsystem symmetries (section 2.5). The first three generalizations can arise in relativistic systems, while the fourth one is only known to occur in non-relativistic contexts, notably in condensed matter models of fractons.

Section 3 is concerned with 't Hooft anomaly matching and applications to QFT dynamics. In section 3.1 we review the notion of an 't Hooft anomaly for ordinary global symmetries, as well as the closely associated concepts of anomaly matching and anomaly inflow. We then outline how these anomalies extend to the generalized symmetries introduced in section 2. In section 3.2 we survey some recent applications of anomaly matching for ordinary and global symmetries.

## <span id="page-2-0"></span>**2** From Ordinary to Generalized Symmetries

#### <span id="page-2-1"></span>2.1 Ordinary Symmetries

Here we summarize a few standard facts about ordinary global symmetries that will set the stage for subsequent generalizations. Throughout this paper, d stands for the spacetime dimension.

In a QFT with an ordinary, or 0-form, global symmetry  $G^{(0)}$ , there is a topological defect  $U^{(0)}(g,\Sigma_{d-1})$  for every group element  $g\in G^{(0)}$  that is supported on a closed codimension-1 submanifold  $\Sigma_{d-1}$  of spacetime. The fusion of the  $U^{(0)}(g,\Sigma_{d-1})$  is governed by the group law for  $G^{(0)}$ . An elementary example is  $G^{(0)}=U(1)$ , in which case Noether's theorem implies a conserved 1-form current  $j^{(1)}$ ,

$$d * j^{(1)} = 0. (1)$$

The combination  $U(1)_{B-L}$  is exactly preserved in the SM, but is expected to be violated by physics beyond the SM (BSM).

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>5</sup> These are symmetric tensors of the Lorentz group with  $s \ge 3$  indices. By contrast, the stress tensor  $T_{\mu\nu}$  is a two-index Lorentz tensor of spin s = 2.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>6</sup> A CFT analogue of the CM theorem was proved in [16].

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>7</sup> We sometimes call  $U^{(0)}(g,\Sigma_{d-1})$  a symmetry defect. For an exposition of this perspective, see for instance [21] and references therein. Throughout we use  $X^{(p)}$  to indicate that X is a p-form.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>8</sup> If  $G^{(0)}$  has an 't Hooft anomaly, it shows up in more complicated configurations of the symmetry defects (see for instance [21]).

We can then construct a conserved charge *Q* (0) (Σ*d*−1), whose exponential gives the *U*(*g*,Σ*d*−1),

$$Q^{(0)}(\Sigma_{d-1}) = \int_{\Sigma_{d-1}} *j^{(1)} , \qquad U^{(0)}(g = e^{i\alpha}, \Sigma_{d-1}) = \exp\left(i\alpha Q^{(0)}(\Sigma_{d-1})\right) . \tag{2}$$

Current conservation and Stokes' theorem imply that the dependence on Σ*d*−<sup>1</sup> is topological, as long as the deformation of Σ*d*−<sup>1</sup> does not collide with other insertions. The group multiplication law follows from the additivity of the charge. In the most familiar setup, Σ*d*−<sup>1</sup> is a spatial slice in Lorentzian signature; in Euclidean signature Σ*d*−<sup>1</sup> can be any suitable closed codimension-1 cycle. Some comments are in order:

• If *G* (0) is non-Abelian and connected, the group law for the *U* (0) (*g*,Σ*d*−1) can be deduced from the fact that the OPE of the currents *j* (1) *<sup>a</sup>* encodes the structure constants *fabc* of the Lie algebra of *G* (0) ,

$$j_a^{(1)}(x)j_b^{(1)}(0) \sim C(x)f_{abc}j_c^{(1)}(0) + \cdots,$$
 (3)

with *C*(*x*) a known, singular function depending on the Lorentz indices of the currents (which we suppress).

- If *G* (0) is not connected (e.g. it could be a discrete group) then some of the symmetry defects*U* (0) (*g*,Σ*d*−1) are not associated with conserved currents; nevertheless they typically exist and have the properties outlined above. This is a generalization of Noether's theorem.[9](#page-0-0)
- *G* (0) naturally acts on local operators by linking them with *U* (0) (*g*,Σ*d*−1). These operators in turn create states (e.g. point particles) charged under *G* (0) . More generally, *G* (0) acts on the Hilbert space H in Lorentzian signature.
- If the vacuum is preserved by a subgroup *H* (0) ⊂ *G* (0) , then the *G* (0) is spontaneously broken to *H* (0) . This leads to a vacuum manifold M = *G* (0)/*H* (0) , and hence to Nambu-Goldstone (NG) bosons (if M has positive dimension) or domain walls between the disconnected components of M. The Hilbert space H in each vacuum furnishes a representation of *H* (0) .
- A QFT*<sup>d</sup>* with *G* (0) symmetry can be coupled to a non-dynamical background *G* (0) connection *A* (1) in a way that preserves background gauge invariance. If *G* (0) has an 't Hooft anomaly this requires placing the theory at the boundary of an invertible anomaly theory A*d*+1[*A* (1) ] that depends on the *G* (0) connection.[10](#page-0-0) The symmetry can then be gauged by path-integrating over *A* (1) .

### <span id="page-3-0"></span>2.2 Higher Form Symmetries

CM-like theorems famously limit possibly generalizations of *G* (0) symmetry in relativistic QFT (see introduction; see below for a discussion of non-relativistic systems). One such generalization, suggested by experience from string theory and SUSY QFT,[11](#page-0-0) was spelled out in [\[24,](#page-11-6) [21\]](#page-11-5):[12](#page-0-0) replace the 1-form current *j* (1) by a (*p*+1)-form current *J* (*p*) satisfying

$$d * J^{(p+1)} = 0. (4)$$

<sup>9</sup> See for instance [\[22\]](#page-11-7) for a recent discussion of possible failure modes, with references.

<sup>10</sup> If one insists on a strictly *d*-dimensional description, the anomaly spoils background gauge-invariance in a mild and familiar way, e.g. the partition function is multiplied by complex phases under *G* (0) gauge transformations.

<sup>11</sup> In string theory, *p*-form symmetries (like all symmetries) are naturally gauged. In SUSY QFT's they can be global symmetries, and the associated charges can extend the SUSY algebra (see [\[23\]](#page-11-8) and references therein).

<sup>12</sup> See [\[25–](#page-11-9)[32\]](#page-11-10) for a highly incomplete sampling of later work focusing on higher-form symmetries.

As before we can construct a charge  $Q^{(p)} = \int_{\Sigma_{d-p-1}} *J^{(p+1)}$  by integrating over a codimension-(p+1) cycle, and a symmetry defect  $U^{(p)}(g=e^{i\alpha},\Sigma_{d-p-1})=\exp(i\alpha Q^{(p)}(\Sigma_{d-p-1}))$ , both of which depend topologically on  $\Sigma_{d-p-1}$ . The symmetry defects satisfy a U(1) group law, and we say that they generate a U(1) p-form symmetry, denoted  $U(1)^{(p)}$ . An important example is free Maxwell theory in any spacetime dimension d, based on a dynamical U(1) connection  $a^{(1)}$  with field strength  $f^{(2)}=da^{(1)}$ . The Maxwell equations,

$$d * f^{(2)} = 0, \ df^{(2)} = 0,$$
 (5)

can be read as conservation equations for an electric 2-form current  $f^{(2)}$  and a magnetic (d-2)-form current  $*f^{(2)}$ . Thus the theory has  $U(1)_e^{(1)} \times U(1)_m^{(d-3)}$  symmetry. Some comments are in order:

- In analogy with 0-form symmetries, we can also consider discrete  $(p \ge 1)$ -form symmetries  $G^{(p)}$ , which are necessarily abelian. For instance, adding fields of electric charge N to Maxwell theory breaks  $U(1)_e^{(1)} \to \mathbb{Z}_N^{(1)}$ . Another important example is the  $\mathbb{Z}_N^{(1)}$  center symmetry of pure SU(N) Yang-Mills theory (and more generally, the center symmetry of any pure gauge theory). Due to their importance in gauge theory, we will mostly focus on 1-form symmetries, but the discussion holds for all p-form symmetries with  $p \ge 1$ .
- All 1-form symmetries  $G^{(1)}$  naturally act on line defects by linking them with the codimension-2 topological symmetry defects  $U^{(1)}(g,\Sigma_{d-2})$ . For instance, the line operators charged under the  $\mathbb{Z}_N^{(1)}$  center symmetry of SU(N) gauge theory are the Wilson lines. However, the 1-form symmetry defects cannot link local operators, and hence such symmetries commute with local operators, as well as with the point particle states they create or with the S-matrix of these particles. This is how  $(p \geq 1)$ -form symmetries evade CM-like theorems.
- 1-form symmetries can spontaneously break. For instance, in dimension  $^{16}$   $d \ge 4$  the photon of theories with an abelian Coulomb phase,  $^{17}$  is a NG boson for its spontaneously broken  $U(1)_e^{(1)}$  symmetry [35, 21, 36, 37]. A spontaneously broken discrete 1-form symmetry leads to deconfined line defects (i.e. defects obeying a perimeter law) at long distances. By contrast, unbroken 1-form symmetry implies confinement of the line operators charged under it.  $^{18}$  Thus, (un)broken 1-form symmetries characterize confined and deconfined phases in the spirit of the Landau paradigm.  $^{19}$

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>13</sup> The statement that these are compact U(1) symmetries is related to the fact that  $a^{(1)}$  is a U(1) connection, with quantized electric charges and magnetic fluxes. The  $U(1)_e^{(1)}$  and  $U(1)_m^{(d-3)}$  symmetries have a mixed 't Hooft anomaly [21] that plays an important role in many applications.

 $<sup>^{14}</sup>$  This is because the associated codimension-(p+1) symmetry defects can always be exchanged without crossing, leading to abelian fusion rules

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>15</sup> In these cases the reduction of the center symmetry to  $\mathbb{Z}_N^{(1)}$  can be understood in terms of screening of the Wilson lines by electrically charged matter.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>16</sup> Similar, long familiar results apply in d=3, involving ordinary rather than higher-form symmetry: the 3d photon can be dualized to a compact scalar, which is the NG boson of spontaneously broken  $U(1)_m^{(0)}$  [33]. In d=3, confinement arises either if  $U(1)_m^{(0)}$  is restored by the vacuum, or if it is explicitly broken, e.g. by 3d instantons (4d monopoles). Explicit breaking gives a mass to the pseudo-NG boson scalar photon [33, 34]. For spontaneously broken  $U(1)_m^{(p)}$  with p>0, the spin-p NG boson does not get a mass from explicit breaking of the symmetry, see [4] and references cited therein for this *robustness* of higher-form symmetry. For d=4, the photon can be viewed as the NG boson of spontaneous breaking of either  $U(1)_e^{(1)}$  or  $U(1)_m^{(1)}$ .

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>17</sup> The low-energy theory has the IR-free photon of Maxwell theory. The photon can have IR irrelevant, higher-derivative interactions if  $U(1)_e^{(1)}$  is accidental; e.g. this happens for supersymmetric theories on their Coulomb branch.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>18</sup> This extends Polyakov's description [38], making the thermal circle there inessential [21].

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>19</sup> See [4] for a recent discussion of generalized symmetries through the lens of condensed matter physics.

- A suitable background field for a *G* (1) symmetry is a 2-form gauge field *B* (2) , [20](#page-0-0) with its standard 1-form gauge transformations *B* (2) → *B* (2) + *d*Λ (1) . [21](#page-0-0) As for ordinary symmetries, the theory is invariant under such transformations up to possible 't Hooft anomalies, which can be cancelled by a suitable invertible anomaly theory A*d*+1[*B* (2) ]. In the absence of 't Hooft anomalies, the *G* (1) symmetry can be gauged by path-integrating over *B* (2) .
- Typically, gauging a *p*-form symmetry *G* (*p*) in *d* spacetime dimensions gives rise to a new theory with a *G*˜(*q*) global symmetry, whose degree *q* depends on whether *G* is discrete or continuous.[22](#page-0-0) For instance, gauging a Z (*p*) *<sup>n</sup>* symmetry in *d* dimensions typically gives rise to a new theory with a Z (*q*=*d*−*p*−2) *<sup>n</sup>* symmetry. This generalizes the familiar twisted sector (or quantum) symmetry of two-dimensional orbifolds, where *d* = 2 and *p* = 0.
- More generally, one can gauge a discrete *p*-form symmetry only along a codimension-*q* submanifold in spacetime. This is known as higher gauging [\[41\]](#page-12-5) of a *p*-form global symmetry. Higher gauging does not change the bulk of the QFT, but generates a codimension-*q* topological defect, known as a condensation defect [\[42](#page-12-6)[–46,](#page-12-7)[41,](#page-12-5)[47\]](#page-12-8). Such condensation defects are generally not invertible, i.e. they generate a non-invertible global symmetry (see section [2.4](#page-6-0) below).

### <span id="page-5-0"></span>2.3 Higher Group Symmetries

Higher group symmetries arise when *p*-form symmetries *G* (*p*) of different form degrees are present and can affect each other in various ways. Roughly speaking, if *p* < *q* then *G* (*p*) can act on *G* (*q*) , while if *p* > *q* the background field *B* (*p*+1) for *G* (*p*) can shift under background gauge transformations of the background field *B* (*q*+1) for *G* (*q*) . The precise form of the shift is determined by certain group cohomology (or Postnikov) classes.[23](#page-0-0)

Higher-group gauge symmetry has a long history in string theory, most famously in the context of the Green-Schwarz (GS) mechanism and its generalizations. The fact that higher groups can also furnish global symmetries of QFTs is a more recent observation that is actively being explored and applied in many contexts, see [\[51](#page-12-9)[–54,](#page-13-0) [25,](#page-11-9) [55,](#page-13-1) [56,](#page-13-2) [40,](#page-12-10) [57](#page-13-3)[–80\]](#page-14-0) for an incomplete sampling of the recent literature.[24](#page-0-0)

Rather than discuss higher-group symmetries in general, we will focus on a concrete and elementary example: a 2-group symmetry involving *G* (0) =*U*(1) (0) *A* and *G* (1) =*U*(1) (1) *B* . [25](#page-0-0) The relevant Postnikov class resides in *H* 3 (*G* (0) ,*G* (1) ), and we assume that it is non-vanishing.[26](#page-0-0) In this case the fusion of the *U*(1) (0) *A* current *j* (1) *<sup>A</sup>* with itself contains the *U*(1) (1) *B* current *J* (2) *B* . Schematically,

$$j^{(1)}(x)_A j_A^{(1)}(0) \sim K(x) J_B^{(2)}(0) + \cdots,$$
 (6)

where *K*(*x*) is a known, singular function depending on the Lorentz indices of the currents. Its overall normalization is determined by the Postnikov class. This fusion rule is reminiscent of the non-Abelian fusion rule for *G* (0) currents above, except that it involves currents of different form degree. The structure of this OPE forces us to deform the algebra of background gauge transformations. In particular, we find that

<sup>20</sup> If *G* (1) is discrete, then *B* (2) is valued in *H* 2 (*Md*,*G* (1) ), where *M<sup>d</sup>* is the spacetime manifold.

<sup>21</sup> Here Λ (1) is the 1-form gauge parameter. Again a refinement is required if *G* (1) is discrete.

<sup>22</sup> More care is required if *G* (*p*) has 't Hooft anomalies or if *p* = 0 and *G* is non-Abelian. See for instance [\[39,](#page-12-11) [40\]](#page-12-10).

<sup>23</sup> See for instance [\[48–](#page-12-12)[50\]](#page-12-13) for a mathematical exposition of higher groups and related subjects.

<sup>24</sup> Note that higher-form global symmetries are a special case of higher-group global symmetries.

<sup>25</sup> Here we assume that *d* > 2. For comments on the *d* = 2 case see for instance [\[25\]](#page-11-9).

<sup>26</sup> Such examples can be engineered in 4d Abelian gauge theories with fermionic mater, where the Postnikov data is determined by certain mixed triangle anomaly coefficients involving two *j* (1) *A* currents and one abelian gauge field. In this case *U*(1) (1) *B* is the magnetic 1-form symmetry of that gauge field (assuming no magnetic matter).

the background field *B* (2) that couples to *J* (2) *B* receives a background GS shift depending on the background field *A* (1) that couples to *j* (1) *A* , as well as on the Postnikov class. Additional details can be found in [\[58,](#page-13-4)[64\]](#page-13-5).

## <span id="page-6-0"></span>2.4 Non-Invertible Symmetries

As reviewed in Section [2.1,](#page-2-1) in relativistic systems, the modern characterization of an ordinary global symmetry is in terms of its topological symmetry operators and defects of codimension one in spacetime. A natural question then arises: While every ordinary global symmetry element is associated with a topological defect, is the converse true? This turns out *not* to be the case: there are topological defects not associated with any ordinary global symmetry. These defects are *non-invertible* because there is no inverse in the fusion algebra and their fusion can involve more than one operator.

In 1+1d, non-invertible topological lines are ubiquitous, especially in rational CFTs and integrable field theories.[27](#page-0-0) In rational CFT [\[81,](#page-14-1) [84,](#page-14-2) [85\]](#page-14-3), there is a general construction of topological lines that commute with the extended chiral algebra [\[86,](#page-14-4)[87\]](#page-14-5). The simplest example is the Kramers-Wannier duality line in the Ising CFT [\[88–](#page-14-6)[90\]](#page-14-7). The fusion of two non-invertible duality lines N gives the sum of the identity line and the Z<sup>2</sup> symmetry line η:

$$\mathcal{N} \times \mathcal{N} = 1 + \eta \,. \tag{7}$$

As we bring the (local) order operator past this line, it becomes a (non-local) disorder operator on the other side.

In recent years, it has been advocated that these non-invertible topological defects should be viewed as a generalization of ordinary global symmetries [\[39,](#page-12-11) [91\]](#page-15-0). The fusion and crossing properties of these topological lines are mathematically captured by a fusion category. The generalized gauging of these lines in 1+1d has been developed in [\[90,](#page-14-7) [92,](#page-15-1) [93,](#page-15-2) [39,](#page-12-11) [94–](#page-15-3)[96\]](#page-15-4). When there is an obstruction to gauging, the corresponding anomalies lead to non-trivial dynamical constraints on the renormalization group flows [\[91,](#page-15-0) [97,](#page-15-5) [94,](#page-15-3) [98\]](#page-15-6). The relation to fermionic anomalies has been discussed in [\[99–](#page-15-7)[103\]](#page-15-8).

In higher spacetime dimensions, there are also examples of non-invertible defects of various codimensions. In 2+1d, the non-abelian anyons in a low-energy TQFT, described by the theory of modular tensor categories, can be viewed as the non-invertible generalization of one-form global symmetries (see [\[104](#page-15-9)[–107,](#page-15-10) [41\]](#page-12-5) for recent discussions). Recently, the non-invertible Kramer-Wannier duality defects have been generalized to 3+1d gauge theories [\[108,](#page-15-11) [109,](#page-15-12) [102,](#page-15-13) [110,](#page-16-0) [47,](#page-12-8) [111,](#page-16-1) [112\]](#page-16-2) via the gauging of higherform global symmetries. More generally, in any theory with a higher-form symmetry, the most fundamental non-invertible symmetries are condensation defects [\[42](#page-12-6)[–46\]](#page-12-7) arising from *higher gauging* [\[41\]](#page-12-5). Condensation defects in 2+1d were systematically analyzed in [\[41\]](#page-12-5), generalizing the results of [\[85,](#page-14-3) [113\]](#page-16-3). The non-invertible fusion "coefficients" of these *n*-dimensional topological defects are generally not numbers, but *n*-dimensional TQFTs [\[41,](#page-12-5) [47\]](#page-12-8). More recently, infinitely many non-invertible global symmetries were identified in the Standard Model and axion models from ABJ anomalies [\[8,](#page-10-9) [9\]](#page-10-10).

Non-invertible defects have also found applications in quantum gravity in the context of the completeness hypothesis [\[114](#page-16-4)[–118\]](#page-16-5). They have also been realized on the lattice [\[119](#page-16-6)[–125,](#page-16-7)[108](#page-15-11)[,126–](#page-16-8)[128\]](#page-17-0), sometimes under the name of "algebraic higher symmetry" [\[129,](#page-17-1) [45\]](#page-12-14).

### <span id="page-6-1"></span>2.5 Subsystem Symmetries and Fractons

A novel kind of global symmetry, known as *subsystem global symmetry*, has featured prominently in many condensed matter systems, including the gapless model of [\[130\]](#page-17-2) and many gapped fracton models

<sup>27</sup> The search for hidden symmetry has a long history in these theories. For instance, in rational CFTs any primary operator *g* with a fusion rule that only contains the identity operator on the right-hand side leads to an invertible abelian symmetry of the theory that can be used to extend the chiral algebra [\[81](#page-14-1)[–83\]](#page-14-8).

[\[131–](#page-17-3)[133\]](#page-17-4). (See [\[134–](#page-17-5)[136\]](#page-17-6) for reviews on fractons, and [\[137\]](#page-17-7) for a Snowmass white paper on field theories for fractons.)

Subsystem symmetry is similar to the higher-form symmetry, but they differ in important ways (see [\[138,](#page-17-8) [139\]](#page-17-9) for related discussions). For both kinds of global symmetries, the conserved charges are supported on closed, higher-codimensional manifolds S in space. Unlike the higher-form symmetry charge, the charge of a subsystem symmetry depends not only on the topology of S , but possibly also on the shape and the location of S . Furthermore, the charge might only be allowed to be on certain S but not all manifolds of a given codimension. On a lattice, the number of independent conserved charges grows with the number of sites, leading to a huge global symmetry in the continuum limit.

Just like ordinary global symmetries, subsystem global symmetries can be spontaneously broken [\[140–](#page-17-10) [146\]](#page-18-0). They can also have 't Hooft anomalies [\[144,](#page-17-11) [147,](#page-18-1) [148\]](#page-18-2), which are obstructions to gauging them. These anomalies are captured by Subsystem Symmetry Protected Topological (SSPT) phases in one higher dimension [\[149–](#page-18-3)[154,](#page-18-4)[148,](#page-18-2)[155\]](#page-18-5). The symmetry fractionalization of subsystem symmetries has been recently discussed in [\[156\]](#page-18-6).

Fractons are a large class of lattice models with subsystem global and gauge symmetries. In 3+1 dimensions, fracton models are robust topological phases with many peculiar properties, including infinite ground state degeneracy that is sub-extensive in the system size, and excitations with restricted mobility. Because of these unusual characteristics, gapped fracton models cannot be described by conventional TQFT. Some fracton models can be realized by gauging a subsystem symmetry [\[133,](#page-17-4) [157–](#page-18-7)[160,](#page-18-8) [144,](#page-17-11) [161\]](#page-18-9). In the low-energy limit, they are typically described by certain exotic higher-rank tensor gauge theories [\[162–](#page-19-0)[170,](#page-19-1) [158,](#page-18-10) [171](#page-19-2)[–178,](#page-19-3) [138,](#page-17-8) [179](#page-20-0)[–181,](#page-20-1) [142–](#page-17-12)[144,](#page-17-11) [182–](#page-20-2)[191\]](#page-20-3).

The most significant consequence of subsystem symmetry is that the low-energy observables are sensitive to details of the short-distance physics. For instance, in fracton models the large ground state degeneracy is enforced by the subsystem global symmetries and their 't Hooft anomalies [\[144,](#page-17-11) [148\]](#page-18-2). Similarly, the restricted mobility of the fracton excitations is traced to the selection rules arising from a subsystem global symmetry, the *time-like global symmetry*, that acts on defects, rather than operators [\[190\]](#page-20-4). This surprising UV/IR mixing [\[142,](#page-17-12) [145,](#page-18-11) [192–](#page-20-5)[194\]](#page-20-6), which is reminiscent of that in quantum field theory on a non-commutative space [\[195\]](#page-20-7), is the main reason why these exotic systems defy a conventional continuum field theory description [\[158,](#page-18-10) [196,](#page-20-8) [197,](#page-20-9) [142–](#page-17-12)[144,](#page-17-11) [198,](#page-21-0) [199,](#page-21-1) [182,](#page-20-2) [161,](#page-18-9) [200,](#page-21-2) [147,](#page-18-1) [186,](#page-20-10) [145,](#page-18-11) [201,](#page-21-3) [202\]](#page-21-4).

<span id="page-7-0"></span>A summary of the various kinds of symmetry described above is given in Table [1.](#page-7-0)

| Properties of     | Ordinary | Higher-form | Non-invertible | Subsystem             |
|-------------------|----------|-------------|----------------|-----------------------|
| symmetry operator | symmetry | symmetry    | symmetry       | symmetry              |
| Codimension       | 1        | ><br>1      | ≥<br>1         | ><br>1                |
| in spacetime      |          |             |                |                       |
| Topological       | yes      | yes         | yes            | not completely        |
|                   |          |             |                | but conserved in time |
| Fusion rule       | group    | group       | category       | group                 |
|                   |          |             |                |                       |

Table 1: Properties of symmetry defects for various kinds of global symmetry [\[203\]](#page-21-5).

# <span id="page-8-0"></span>3 Anomalies and Dynamical Consequences of Symmetry

## <span id="page-8-1"></span>3.1 Anomalies and Anomaly Matching

The strong force, confinement, dualities, and emergent degrees of freedom illustrate how renormalization group (RG) flows can lead to surprising interconnections between classically very different UV descriptions of IR physics, or between the UV and IR limits of RG flows. A key feature of any concept of symmetry is how it survives continuous, symmetry preserving deformations of the theory. This includes in particular renormalization group flows: if at short distances a model supports a given symmetry, then the same symmetry must be present in any long distance effective field theory.[28](#page-0-0)

This idea of global symmetry matching between the ultraviolet and the infrared becomes remarkably powerful when extended to include 't Hooft anomalies of global symmetries. 't Hooft's pioneering idea [\[12\]](#page-10-8) was to view such anomalies as an obstruction to gauging a global symmetry, and to argue that they must be invariant under the renormalization group by coupling to a suitable set of spectator (i.e. weakly interacting) fermions. Subsequently, this idea of anomaly matching was understood as constraints on various structure functions of conserved current correlation functions [\[204,](#page-21-6) [205\]](#page-21-7).

The modern point of view of anomalies is that of anomaly inflow [\[206\]](#page-21-8) (see also [\[207\]](#page-21-9)) where an anomaly of a *d*-dimensional quantum field theory with spacetime *X<sup>d</sup>* is presented via a theory A*d*+<sup>1</sup> in *d*+1 spacetime dimensions, with bulk spacetime *Yd*+<sup>1</sup> such that the original spacetime is the boundary of the bulk spacetime, *X<sup>d</sup>* = ∂*Yd*+1. In some contexts, e.g. [\[206,](#page-21-8)[208,](#page-21-10)[209\]](#page-21-11), the *d* +1-dimensional anomaly theory A*d*+<sup>1</sup> has a clear physical interpretation, with the lower dimensional anomalous theory arising as a defect in the ambient physical system.[29](#page-0-0) This point of view is conceptually similar to that of symmetry protected topological phases in condensed matter physics, where a trivially gapped system in bulk gives rise to anomalous edge modes on its boundary. From a more abstract perspective, the anomaly theory generalizes the concept of projective representations, which describe simple anomalies in quantum mechanics (see e.g. [\[26\]](#page-11-12)), to the quantum field theory setting. The anomaly theory can be taken as the definition of the anomaly, and this notation can be applied to generalized symmetries. The anomaly theory A*d*+<sup>1</sup> has been significantly developed and applied in recent years in the high energy, condensed matter, and mathematics communities. This includes results for familiar continuous global symmetries [\[214](#page-21-12)[–220\]](#page-22-0), discrete global symmetries [\[221](#page-22-1)[–225,](#page-22-2)[56,](#page-13-2)[226](#page-22-3)[–230\]](#page-22-4), higher-form and higher-group symmetries [\[52,](#page-12-15)[54,](#page-13-0)[58,](#page-13-4)[59,](#page-13-6)[231,](#page-22-5)[74\]](#page-14-9), and subsystem symmetries [\[144,](#page-17-11) [147,](#page-18-1) [148\]](#page-18-2), families of quantum field theories [\[232](#page-22-6)[–241\]](#page-23-0), as well as structural developments [\[242–](#page-23-1)[244,](#page-23-2) [40,](#page-12-10) [99,](#page-15-7) [245](#page-23-3)[–249,](#page-23-4) [55,](#page-13-1) [250,](#page-23-5) [251\]](#page-23-6).

For continuous global symmetries in even *d*, the anomaly theory A*d*+<sup>1</sup> is often a Chern-Simons-type TQFT, as in the descent formalism of [\[252\]](#page-24-0) and references therein. More generally, global or nonperturbative anomalies can be described via the η-invariant [\[253\]](#page-24-1) which can also be described via inflow [\[254,](#page-24-2) [255\]](#page-24-3). In the context of *AdSd*+<sup>1</sup> ↔ *CFT<sup>d</sup>* duality, the anomaly theory A*d*+<sup>1</sup> is a topological subsector of the *AdSd*+<sup>1</sup> bulk gravity theory [\[256\]](#page-24-4). The anomaly theory A*d*+<sup>1</sup> for a traditional QFT merely encodes an overall phase, so it is associated with a one-dimensional Hilbert space. The anomaly theory in such cases is called *invertible* [\[257,](#page-24-5) [258\]](#page-24-6) (see also [\[55,](#page-13-1) [259,](#page-24-7) [260\]](#page-24-8)).[30](#page-0-0)

<sup>28</sup> Of course symmetries can be enhanced in the IR, by additional, accidental components. Moreover, symmetries can decouple in the IR if they only act non-trivially on degrees of freedom that have been decoupled from the low-energy theory. Most precisely, there is a homomorphism from the symmetry group of the UV to that of the IR.

<sup>29</sup> If the anomalous symmetries are gauged on the defect, the bulk theory is physical and cannot be decoupled; there is no "genuine" *d* dimensional theory in this case. For 't Hooft anomalies, the dynamics of the bulk *d* + 1 dimensional theory can decoupled, leaving only the anomaly. A classic example are the *d* + 1 dimensional Wess-Zumino-Witten terms for the pions of 4d QCD in the chiral symmetry broken phase [\[210,](#page-21-13) [211\]](#page-21-14) and 2d non-linear sigma models [\[212\]](#page-21-15). Another example are the chiral, domain wall fermions of [\[213\]](#page-21-16), where the defect arises via spatially dependent backgrounds (the Dirac mass) in the bulk.

<sup>30</sup> There are also more exotic *d*-dimensional QFTs, sometimes called relative [\[261\]](#page-24-9) or meta or non-genuine theories, where the A*d*+<sup>1</sup> theory plays a more essential role than just a projective phase and is instead associated with a multi-dimensional Hilbert

### <span id="page-9-0"></span>3.2 Applications to QFT Dynamics

There are a wide variety of applications of anomalies and symmetry to the dynamics of quantum field theory. Due to their robust nature, symmetries and their associated anomalies can often be reliably computed in weakly coupled limits of a theory, and then applied to constrain the dynamics of strongly coupled phases. For ordinary continuous global symmetries, non-zero 't Hooft anomalies preclude a mass gap: the IR theory must have massless chiral fields that saturate the anomalies in the unbroken case, or massless NGBs (with a WZW-type term) in the spontaneously broken case. For discrete global symmetries, nonzero 't Hooft anomalies can also in some cases be matched by a gapped TQFT (if an obstruction [\[265,](#page-24-10)[266\]](#page-24-11) vanishes). 't Hooft anomaly matching played a key role in the discovery of electromagnetic dualities in four-dimensional gauge theories [\[267–](#page-24-12)[269\]](#page-24-13) and has since become an essential field theory technique. Modern applications are inspired by this example but expand the logic to the more general concepts of symmetry described above, and hence to the more general class of invertible field theories encoding their anomalies. Below we highlight several classes of examples.

Higher form symmetry has been crucial in understanding the infrared behavior of Chern-Simons matter theories in three dimensions. In this context one also finds a close link to fundamental concepts in threedimensional topological field theory where one-form symmetry generators can be interpreted as abelian anyons [\[24,](#page-11-6) [21,](#page-11-5) [270–](#page-25-0)[273,](#page-25-1) [28,](#page-11-13) [274,](#page-25-2) [275\]](#page-25-3). The language of higher form symmetry then gives a way to understand the properties of these line defects in a broader context of non-topological field theories. In particular this has given rise to an explosion of new level-rank and boson-fermion dualities for such interacting phases [\[276,](#page-25-4) [273,](#page-25-1) [277](#page-25-5)[–284\]](#page-25-6), as well as new results for the phase diagrams of strongly interacting gauge theories [\[285–](#page-25-7)[288,](#page-26-0) [279,](#page-25-8) [281,](#page-25-9) [289,](#page-26-1) [290,](#page-26-2) [283,](#page-25-10) [291\]](#page-26-3).

In four spacetime dimensions there have also been extensive recent applications of symmetry to constrain the dynamics of gauge theories [\[53,](#page-13-7)[271,](#page-25-11)[292](#page-26-4)[–298,](#page-26-5)[60,](#page-13-8)[299–](#page-26-6)[304,](#page-27-0)[31,](#page-11-14)[63,](#page-13-9)[305–](#page-27-1)[310,](#page-27-2)[69,](#page-13-10)[311,](#page-27-3)[72,](#page-14-10)[312,](#page-27-4)[310,](#page-27-2) [313–](#page-27-5)[316\]](#page-27-6). In these gauge theory contexts, one-form symmetry finds a natural utilization as the symmetry governing the transition between confinement and deconfinement [\[21\]](#page-11-5). A highlight is the identification of an anomaly at θ = π in certain pure Yang-Mills theories implying non-trivial long-distance dynamics of these models [\[26\]](#page-11-12). There is also a natural link to the three-dimensional Chern-Simons matter results which often manifest on domain walls in four dimensions [\[317–](#page-27-7)[322\]](#page-28-0). Further there is a sharp interplay between anomalies, spontaneous symmetry breaking, and the mass gap in such theories [\[323–](#page-28-1)[327,](#page-28-2) [265,](#page-24-10) [266,](#page-24-11) [328\]](#page-28-3).

The extensive appearance of higher-form symmetry in quantum field theory means that frequently one finds higher group global symetries, which have their own anomalies and dynamical implications. Highergroup global symmetry has also been extensively explored in five and six-dimensional quantum field theory and little string theories [\[329,](#page-28-4) [32,](#page-11-10) [61,](#page-13-11) [30,](#page-11-15) [330,](#page-28-5) [71,](#page-14-11) [331,](#page-28-6) [75,](#page-14-12) [76,](#page-14-13) [79,](#page-14-14) [332\]](#page-28-7), where in the latter continuous higher symmetry is particularly natural due to the presence of a conserved string number [\[333,](#page-28-8) [64\]](#page-13-5). In particular, these ideas have been applied to better understand certain supersymmetric dualities [\[334–](#page-28-9)[336,](#page-28-10)[65,](#page-13-12)[337–](#page-28-11)[339\]](#page-29-0), and to derive universal constraints on renormalization group flows [\[340](#page-29-1)[–342\]](#page-29-2).

Similar to the anomaly constraints from an ordinary symmetry, the non-invertible symmetries also have dramatic consequences on renormalization group flows. In two-dimensional QFT, invertible and noninvertible topological lines have been explored extensively in [\[39,](#page-12-11)[91,](#page-15-0)[343,](#page-29-3)[97,](#page-15-5)[246,](#page-23-7)[101,](#page-15-14)[94,](#page-15-3)[344](#page-29-4)[–351,](#page-29-5)[229,](#page-22-7)[98,](#page-15-6) [352,](#page-29-6)[96,](#page-15-4)[353\]](#page-29-7) in recent years with various dynamical applications. In particular, using a modular invariance argument, it was shown in [\[91\]](#page-15-0) (see also [\[97\]](#page-15-5) for generalizations) that the existence of certain non-invertible topological lines is incompatible with a trivially gapped phase. There are also recent applications to 2d adjoint QCD, clarifying the infrared behavior [\[94\]](#page-15-3). In four-dimensional theories the dynamical implications of non-invertible symmetry are just beginning to emerge with recent results on anomalies of such symmetries [\[109,](#page-15-12) [47\]](#page-12-8) and applications to Yang-Mills theory [\[102\]](#page-15-13).

space. This was seen in the context of 2d chiral RCFTs, where the bulk is a 3d Chern-Simons theory [\[81,](#page-14-1) [262\]](#page-24-14). Other examples include certain 6d N = (2,0) theories, which arise at the boundary of 7d Chern-Simons type theories, see e.g. [\[263,](#page-24-15) [21,](#page-11-5) [264,](#page-24-16) [32\]](#page-11-10).

# Acknowledgements

We are grateful to our collaborators and colleagues who have helped shape this exciting subject, and to the organizers of the formal theory Snowmass process, L. Rastelli, and D. Poland, for inviting us to contribute this white paper. CC, TD, and KI acknowledge support from the Simons Collaboration on Global Categorical Symmetries. In addition CC is supported by the US Department of Energy DE-SC0021432; TD is supported by a DOE Early Career Award under DE-SC0020421 and the Mani L. Bhaumik Presidential Chair in Theoretical Physics at UCLA; KI is supported by DOE award DE-SC0009919 and Simons Foundation award 568420.

## References

- <span id="page-10-0"></span>[1] E. Noether, *Invariant Variation Problems*, *Gott. Nachr.* 1918 (1918) 235–257, [physics/0503066].
- <span id="page-10-1"></span>[2] N. Byers, *E. Noether's discovery of the deep connection between symmetries and conservation laws*, in *Symposium on the Heritage of Emmy Noether*, 7, 1998. physics/9807044.
- <span id="page-10-2"></span>[3] L. D. Landau, *On the theory of phase transitions*, *Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.* 7 (1937) 19–32.
- <span id="page-10-3"></span>[4] J. McGreevy, *Generalized Symmetries in Condensed Matter*, arXiv:2204.03045.
- <span id="page-10-4"></span>[5] S. Elitzur, *Impossibility of Spontaneously Breaking Local Symmetries*, *Phys. Rev. D* 12 (1975) 3978–3982.
- <span id="page-10-5"></span>[6] S. L. Adler, *Axial vector vertex in spinor electrodynamics*, *Phys. Rev.* 177 (1969) 2426–2438.
- <span id="page-10-6"></span>[7] J. S. Bell and R. Jackiw, *A PCAC puzzle:* π <sup>0</sup> → γγ *in the* σ *model*, *Nuovo Cim. A* 60 (1969) 47–61.
- <span id="page-10-9"></span>[8] Y. Choi, H. T. Lam, and S.-H. Shao, *Non-invertible Global Symmetries in the Standard Model*, arXiv:2205.05086.
- <span id="page-10-10"></span>[9] C. Cordova and K. Ohmori, ´ *Non-Invertible Chiral Symmetry and Exponential Hierarchies*, arXiv:2205.06243.
- <span id="page-10-7"></span>[10] G. 't Hooft, *How Instantons Solve the U(1) Problem*, *Phys. Rept.* 142 (1986) 357–387.
- <span id="page-10-11"></span>[11] S. Coleman, *Aspects of Symmetry: Selected Erice Lectures*. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1985.
- <span id="page-10-8"></span>[12] G. 't Hooft, *Naturalness, chiral symmetry, and spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking*, *NATO Sci. Ser. B* 59 (1980) 135–157.
- <span id="page-10-12"></span>[13] D. Harlow, B. Heidenreich, M. Reece, and T. Rudelius, *The Weak Gravity Conjecture: A Review*, arXiv:2201.08380.
- <span id="page-10-13"></span>[14] A. B. Zamolodchikov and A. B. Zamolodchikov, *Factorized s Matrices in Two-Dimensions as the Exact Solutions of Certain Relativistic Quantum Field Models*, *Annals Phys.* 120 (1979) 253–291.
- <span id="page-10-14"></span>[15] S. R. Coleman and J. Mandula, *All Possible Symmetries of the S Matrix*, *Phys. Rev.* 159 (1967) 1251–1256.

- <span id="page-11-4"></span>[16] J. Maldacena and A. Zhiboedov, *Constraining Conformal Field Theories with A Higher Spin Symmetry*, *J. Phys. A* 46 (2013) 214011, [arXiv:1112.1016].
- <span id="page-11-0"></span>[17] R. Haag, J. T. Lopuszanski, and M. Sohnius, *All Possible Generators of Supersymmetries of the s Matrix*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 88 (1975) 257.
- <span id="page-11-1"></span>[18] W. Nahm, *Supersymmetries and their Representations*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 135 (1978) 149.
- <span id="page-11-2"></span>[19] P. C. Argyres, J. J. Heckman, K. Intriligator, and M. Martone, *Snowmass White Paper on SCFTs*, arXiv:2202.07683.
- <span id="page-11-3"></span>[20] D. Poland and D. Simmons-Duffin, *Snowmass White Paper: The Numerical Conformal Bootstrap*, in *2022 Snowmass Summer Study*, 3, 2022. arXiv:2203.08117.
- <span id="page-11-5"></span>[21] D. Gaiotto, A. Kapustin, N. Seiberg, and B. Willett, *Generalized Global Symmetries*, *JHEP* 02 (2015) 172, [arXiv:1412.5148].
- <span id="page-11-7"></span>[22] D. Harlow and H. Ooguri, *Symmetries in quantum field theory and quantum gravity*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 383 (2021), no. 3 1669–1804, [arXiv:1810.05338].
- <span id="page-11-8"></span>[23] T. T. Dumitrescu and N. Seiberg, *Supercurrents and Brane Currents in Diverse Dimensions*, *JHEP* 07 (2011) 095, [arXiv:1106.0031].
- <span id="page-11-6"></span>[24] A. Kapustin and N. Seiberg, *Coupling a QFT to a TQFT and Duality*, *JHEP* 04 (2014) 001, [arXiv:1401.0740].
- <span id="page-11-9"></span>[25] E. Sharpe, *Notes on generalized global symmetries in QFT*, *Fortsch. Phys.* 63 (2015) 659–682, [arXiv:1508.04770].
- <span id="page-11-12"></span>[26] D. Gaiotto, A. Kapustin, Z. Komargodski, and N. Seiberg, *Theta, Time Reversal, and Temperature*, *JHEP* 05 (2017) 091, [arXiv:1703.00501].
- [27] D. M. Hofman and N. Iqbal, *Generalized global symmetries and holography*, *SciPost Phys.* 4 (2018), no. 1 005, [arXiv:1707.08577].
- <span id="page-11-13"></span>[28] P.-S. Hsin, H. T. Lam, and N. Seiberg, *Comments on One-Form Global Symmetries and Their Gauging in 3d and 4d*, *SciPost Phys.* 6 (2019), no. 3 039, [arXiv:1812.04716].
- [29] P.-S. Hsin and S.-H. Shao, *Lorentz Symmetry Fractionalization and Dualities in (2+1)d*, *SciPost Phys.* 8 (2020) 018, [arXiv:1909.07383].
- <span id="page-11-15"></span>[30] D. R. Morrison, S. Schafer-Nameki, and B. Willett, *Higher-Form Symmetries in 5d*, *JHEP* 09 (2020) 024, [arXiv:2005.12296].
- <span id="page-11-14"></span>[31] M. Del Zotto, I. n. Garc´ıa Etxebarria, and S. S. Hosseini, *Higher form symmetries of Argyres-Douglas theories*, *JHEP* 10 (2020) 056, [arXiv:2007.15603].
- <span id="page-11-10"></span>[32] S. Gukov, P.-S. Hsin, and D. Pei, *Generalized global symmetries of T*[*M*] *theories. Part I*, *JHEP* 04 (2021) 232, [arXiv:2010.15890].
- <span id="page-11-11"></span>[33] A. M. Polyakov, *Quark Confinement and Topology of Gauge Groups*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 120 (1977) 429–458.

- <span id="page-12-3"></span>[34] I. Affleck, J. A. Harvey, and E. Witten, *Instantons and (Super)Symmetry Breaking in (2+1)-Dimensions*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 206 (1982) 413–439.
- <span id="page-12-0"></span>[35] A. Kovner and B. Rosenstein, *New look at QED in four-dimensions: The Photon as a Goldstone boson and the topological interpretation of electric charge*, *Phys. Rev. D* 49 (1994) 5571–5581, [hep-th/9210154].
- <span id="page-12-1"></span>[36] D. M. Hofman and N. Iqbal, *Goldstone modes and photonization for higher form symmetries*, *SciPost Phys.* 6 (2019), no. 1 006, [arXiv:1802.09512].
- <span id="page-12-2"></span>[37] E. Lake, *Higher-form symmetries and spontaneous symmetry breaking*, arXiv:1802.07747.
- <span id="page-12-4"></span>[38] A. M. Polyakov, *Thermal Properties of Gauge Fields and Quark Liberation*, *Phys. Lett. B* 72 (1978) 477–480.
- <span id="page-12-11"></span>[39] L. Bhardwaj and Y. Tachikawa, *On finite symmetries and their gauging in two dimensions*, *JHEP* 03 (2018) 189, [arXiv:1704.02330].
- <span id="page-12-10"></span>[40] Y. Tachikawa, *On gauging finite subgroups*, *SciPost Phys.* 8 (2020), no. 1 015, [arXiv:1712.09542].
- <span id="page-12-5"></span>[41] K. Roumpedakis, S. Seifnashri, and S.-H. Shao, *Higher Gauging and Non-invertible Condensation Defects*, arXiv:2204.02407.
- <span id="page-12-6"></span>[42] L. Kong and X.-G. Wen, *Braided fusion categories, gravitational anomalies, and the mathematical framework for topological orders in any dimensions*, arXiv:1405.5858.
- [43] D. V. Else and C. Nayak, *Cheshire charge in (3+1)-dimensional topological phases*, *Phys. Rev. B* 96 (2017), no. 4 045136, [arXiv:1702.02148].
- [44] D. Gaiotto and T. Johnson-Freyd, *Condensations in higher categories*, arXiv:1905.09566.
- <span id="page-12-14"></span>[45] L. Kong, T. Lan, X.-G. Wen, Z.-H. Zhang, and H. Zheng, *Algebraic higher symmetry and categorical symmetry – a holographic and entanglement view of symmetry*, *Phys. Rev. Res.* 2 (2020), no. 4 043086, [arXiv:2005.14178].
- <span id="page-12-7"></span>[46] T. Johnson-Freyd, *(3+1)D topological orders with only a* Z2*-charged particle*, arXiv:2011.11165.
- <span id="page-12-8"></span>[47] Y. Choi, C. Cordova, P.-S. Hsin, H. T. Lam, and S.-H. Shao, ´ *Non-invertible Condensation, Duality, and Triality Defects in 3+1 Dimensions*, arXiv:2204.09025.
- <span id="page-12-12"></span>[48] J. C. Baez and A. D. Lauda, *Higher-dimensional algebra v: 2-groups*, *Version* 3 (2004) 423–491.
- [49] J. Baez and U. Schreiber, *Higher gauge theory: 2-connections on 2-bundles*, hep-th/0412325.
- <span id="page-12-13"></span>[50] U. Schreiber and K. Waldorf, *Connections on non-Abelian Gerbes and their Holonomy*, *Theory Appl. Categ.* 28 (2013) 476–540, [arXiv:0808.1923].
- <span id="page-12-9"></span>[51] A. Kapustin and R. Thorngren, *Topological Field Theory on a Lattice, Discrete Theta-Angles and Confinement*, *Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.* 18 (2014), no. 5 1233–1247, [arXiv:1308.2926].
- <span id="page-12-15"></span>[52] A. Kapustin and R. Thorngren, *Higher symmetry and gapped phases of gauge theories*, arXiv:1309.4721.

- <span id="page-13-7"></span>[53] S. Gukov and A. Kapustin, *Topological Quantum Field Theory, Nonlocal Operators, and Gapped Phases of Gauge Theories*, arXiv:1307.4793.
- <span id="page-13-0"></span>[54] R. Thorngren and C. von Keyserlingk, *Higher SPT's and a generalization of anomaly in-flow*, arXiv:1511.02929.
- <span id="page-13-1"></span>[55] D. Gaiotto and T. Johnson-Freyd, *Symmetry Protected Topological phases and Generalized Cohomology*, *JHEP* 05 (2019) 007, [arXiv:1712.07950].
- <span id="page-13-2"></span>[56] L. Bhardwaj, D. Gaiotto, and A. Kapustin, *State sum constructions of spin-TFTs and string net constructions of fermionic phases of matter*, *JHEP* 04 (2017) 096, [arXiv:1605.01640].
- <span id="page-13-3"></span>[57] C. Delcamp and A. Tiwari, *From gauge to higher gauge models of topological phases*, *JHEP* 10 (2018) 049, [arXiv:1802.10104].
- <span id="page-13-4"></span>[58] C. Cordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, and K. Intriligator, ´ *Exploring 2-Group Global Symmetries*, *JHEP* 02 (2019) 184, [arXiv:1802.04790].
- <span id="page-13-6"></span>[59] F. Benini, C. Cordova, and P.-S. Hsin, ´ *On 2-Group Global Symmetries and their Anomalies*, *JHEP* 03 (2019) 118, [arXiv:1803.09336].
- <span id="page-13-8"></span>[60] Y. Tanizaki and M. Unsal, ¨ *Modified instanton sum in QCD and higher-groups*, *JHEP* 03 (2020) 123, [arXiv:1912.01033].
- <span id="page-13-11"></span>[61] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, and R. Minasian, *Discrete and higher-form symmetries in SCFTs from wrapped M5-branes*, *JHEP* 03 (2021) 196, [arXiv:2007.15003].
- [62] L. Bhardwaj and S. Schafer-Nameki, ¨ *Higher-form symmetries of 6d and 5d theories*, *JHEP* 02 (2021) 159, [arXiv:2008.09600].
- <span id="page-13-9"></span>[63] P.-S. Hsin and H. T. Lam, *Discrete theta angles, symmetries and anomalies*, *SciPost Phys.* 10 (2021), no. 2 032, [arXiv:2007.05915].
- <span id="page-13-5"></span>[64] C. Cordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, and K. Intriligator, ´ *2-Group Global Symmetries and Anomalies in Six-Dimensional Quantum Field Theories*, *JHEP* 04 (2021) 252, [arXiv:2009.00138].
- <span id="page-13-12"></span>[65] M. Del Zotto and K. Ohmori, *2-Group Symmetries of 6D Little String Theories and T-Duality*, *Annales Henri Poincare* 22 (2021), no. 7 2451–2474, [arXiv:2009.03489].
- [66] N. Iqbal and N. Poovuttikul, *2-group global symmetries, hydrodynamics and holography*, arXiv:2010.00320.
- [67] Y. Hidaka, M. Nitta, and R. Yokokura, *Global 3-group symmetry and 't Hooft anomalies in axion electrodynamics*, *JHEP* 01 (2021) 173, [arXiv:2009.14368].
- [68] T. D. Brennan and C. Cordova, ´ *Axions, higher-groups, and emergent symmetry*, *JHEP* 02 (2022) 145, [arXiv:2011.09600].
- <span id="page-13-10"></span>[69] Y. Lee, K. Ohmori, and Y. Tachikawa, *Matching higher symmetries across Intriligator-Seiberg duality*, *JHEP* 10 (2021) 114, [arXiv:2108.05369].
- [70] F. Apruzzi, L. Bhardwaj, J. Oh, and S. Schafer-Nameki, *The Global Form of Flavor Symmetries and 2-Group Symmetries in 5d SCFTs*, arXiv:2105.08724.

- <span id="page-14-11"></span>[71] F. Apruzzi, F. Bonetti, I. n. G. Etxebarria, S. S. Hosseini, and S. Schafer-Nameki, *Symmetry TFTs from String Theory*, arXiv:2112.02092.
- <span id="page-14-10"></span>[72] L. Bhardwaj, *2-Group Symmetries in Class S*, arXiv:2107.06816.
- [73] F. Apruzzi, L. Bhardwaj, D. S. W. Gould, and S. Schafer-Nameki, *2-Group Symmetries and their Classification in 6d*, arXiv:2110.14647.
- <span id="page-14-9"></span>[74] P.-S. Hsin, W. Ji, and C.-M. Jian, *Exotic Invertible Phases with Higher-Group Symmetries*, arXiv:2105.09454.
- <span id="page-14-12"></span>[75] M. Del Zotto, I. n. G. Etxebarria, and S. Schafer-Nameki, *2-Group Symmetries and M-Theory*, arXiv:2203.10097.
- <span id="page-14-13"></span>[76] M. Cvetic, J. J. Heckman, M. H ˇ ubner, and E. Torres, ¨ *0-Form, 1-Form and 2-Group Symmetries via Cutting and Gluing of Orbifolds*, arXiv:2203.10102.
- [77] E. Sharpe, *An introduction to decomposition*, arXiv:2204.09117.
- [78] T. Pantev, D. Robbins, E. Sharpe, and T. Vandermeulen, *Orbifolds by 2-groups and decomposition*, arXiv:2204.13708.
- <span id="page-14-14"></span>[79] M. Del Zotto, J. J. Heckman, S. N. Meynet, R. Moscrop, and H. Y. Zhang, *Higher Symmetries of 5d Orbifold SCFTs*, arXiv:2201.08372.
- <span id="page-14-0"></span>[80] M. Del Zotto and I. n. G. Etxebarria, *Global Structures from the Infrared*, arXiv:2204.06495.
- <span id="page-14-1"></span>[81] G. W. Moore and N. Seiberg, *Classical and Quantum Conformal Field Theory*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 123 (1989) 177.
- [82] K. A. Intriligator, *Bonus Symmetry in Conformal Field Theory*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 332 (1990) 541–565.
- <span id="page-14-8"></span>[83] A. N. Schellekens and S. Yankielowicz, *Extended Chiral Algebras and Modular Invariant Partition Functions*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 327 (1989) 673–703.
- <span id="page-14-2"></span>[84] G. W. Moore and N. Seiberg, *Taming the Conformal Zoo*, *Phys. Lett. B* 220 (1989) 422–430.
- <span id="page-14-3"></span>[85] J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, *TFT construction of RCFT correlators 1. Partition functions*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 646 (2002) 353–497, [hep-th/0204148].
- <span id="page-14-4"></span>[86] E. P. Verlinde, *Fusion Rules and Modular Transformations in 2D Conformal Field Theory*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 300 (1988) 360–376.
- <span id="page-14-5"></span>[87] V. B. Petkova and J. B. Zuber, *Generalized twisted partition functions*, *Phys. Lett. B* 504 (2001) 157–164, [hep-th/0011021].
- <span id="page-14-6"></span>[88] J. Frohlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, *Kramers-Wannier duality from conformal defects*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 93 (2004) 070601, [cond-mat/0404051].
- [89] J. Frohlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, *Duality and defects in rational conformal field theory*, *Nucl. Phys.* B763 (2007) 354–430, [hep-th/0607247].
- <span id="page-14-7"></span>[90] J. Frohlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, *Defect lines, dualities, and generalised orbifolds*, in *Proceedings, 16th International Congress on Mathematical Physics (ICMP09): Prague, Czech Republic, August 3-8, 2009*, 2009. arXiv:0909.5013.

- <span id="page-15-0"></span>[91] C.-M. Chang, Y.-H. Lin, S.-H. Shao, Y. Wang, and X. Yin, *Topological Defect Lines and Renormalization Group Flows in Two Dimensions*, *JHEP* 01 (2019) 026, [arXiv:1802.04445].
- <span id="page-15-1"></span>[92] N. Carqueville and I. Runkel, *Orbifold completion of defect bicategories*, *Quantum Topol.* 7 (2016) 203, [arXiv:1210.6363].
- <span id="page-15-2"></span>[93] I. Brunner, N. Carqueville, and D. Plencner, *A quick guide to defect orbifolds*, *Proc. Symp. Pure Math.* 88 (2014) 231–242, [arXiv:1310.0062].
- <span id="page-15-3"></span>[94] Z. Komargodski, K. Ohmori, K. Roumpedakis, and S. Seifnashri, *Symmetries and strings of adjoint QCD*2, *JHEP* 03 (2021) 103, [arXiv:2008.07567].
- [95] D. Gaiotto and J. Kulp, *Orbifold groupoids*, *JHEP* 02 (2021) 132, [arXiv:2008.05960].
- <span id="page-15-4"></span>[96] T.-C. Huang, Y.-H. Lin, and S. Seifnashri, *Construction of two-dimensional topological field theories with non-invertible symmetries*, arXiv:2110.02958.
- <span id="page-15-5"></span>[97] R. Thorngren and Y. Wang, *Fusion Category Symmetry I: Anomaly In-Flow and Gapped Phases*, arXiv:1912.02817.
- <span id="page-15-6"></span>[98] R. Thorngren and Y. Wang, *Fusion Category Symmetry II: Categoriosities at c = 1 and Beyond*, arXiv:2106.12577.
- <span id="page-15-7"></span>[99] R. Thorngren, *Anomalies and Bosonization*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 378 (2020), no. 3 1775–1816, [arXiv:1810.04414].
- [100] W. Ji, S.-H. Shao, and X.-G. Wen, *Topological Transition on the Conformal Manifold*, *Phys. Rev. Res.* 2 (2020), no. 3 033317, [arXiv:1909.01425].
- <span id="page-15-14"></span>[101] Y.-H. Lin and S.-H. Shao, *Duality Defect of the Monster CFT*, *J. Phys. A* 54 (2021), no. 6 065201, [arXiv:1911.00042].
- <span id="page-15-13"></span>[102] J. Kaidi, K. Ohmori, and Y. Zheng, *Kramers-Wannier-like Duality Defects in (3+1)D Gauge Theories*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 128 (2022), no. 11 111601, [arXiv:2111.01141].
- <span id="page-15-8"></span>[103] I. M. Burbano, J. Kulp, and J. Neuser, *Duality Defects in E*8, arXiv:2112.14323.
- <span id="page-15-9"></span>[104] J. Kaidi, Z. Komargodski, K. Ohmori, S. Seifnashri, and S.-H. Shao, *Higher central charges and topological boundaries in 2+1-dimensional TQFTs*, arXiv:2107.13091.
- [105] M. Buican and R. Radhakrishnan, *Galois orbits of TQFTs: symmetries and unitarity*, *JHEP* 01 (2022) 004, [arXiv:2109.02766].
- [106] M. Yu, *Gauging Categorical Symmetries in 3d Topological Orders and Bulk Reconstruction*, arXiv:2111.13697.
- <span id="page-15-10"></span>[107] F. Benini, C. Copetti, and L. Di Pietro, *Factorization and Global Symmetries in Holography*, arXiv:2203.09537.
- <span id="page-15-11"></span>[108] M. Koide, Y. Nagoya, and S. Yamaguchi, *Non-invertible topological defects in 4-dimensional* Z<sup>2</sup> *pure lattice gauge theory*, arXiv:2109.05992.
- <span id="page-15-12"></span>[109] Y. Choi, C. Cordova, P.-S. Hsin, H. T. Lam, and S.-H. Shao, ´ *Non-Invertible Duality Defects in 3+1 Dimensions*, arXiv:2111.01139.

- <span id="page-16-0"></span>[110] Y. Hayashi and Y. Tanizaki, *Non-invertible self-duality defects of Cardy-Rabinovici model and mixed gravitational anomaly*, arXiv:2204.07440.
- <span id="page-16-1"></span>[111] L. Bhardwaj, L. Bottini, S. Schafer-Nameki, and A. Tiwari, *Non-Invertible Higher-Categorical Symmetries*, arXiv:2204.06564.
- <span id="page-16-2"></span>[112] J. Kaidi, G. Zafrir, and Y. Zheng, *Non-Invertible Symmetries of* N = 4 *SYM and Twisted Compactification*, arXiv:2205.01104.
- <span id="page-16-3"></span>[113] A. Kapustin and N. Saulina, *Surface operators in 3d Topological Field Theory and 2d Rational Conformal Field Theory*, arXiv:1012.0911.
- <span id="page-16-4"></span>[114] T. Rudelius and S.-H. Shao, *Topological Operators and Completeness of Spectrum in Discrete Gauge Theories*, *JHEP* 12 (2020) 172, [arXiv:2006.10052].
- [115] B. Heidenreich, J. McNamara, M. Montero, M. Reece, T. Rudelius, and I. Valenzuela, *Non-Invertible Global Symmetries and Completeness of the Spectrum*, *JHEP* 09 (2021) 203, [arXiv:2104.07036].
- [116] J. McNamara, *Gravitational Solitons and Completeness*, arXiv:2108.02228.
- [117] C. Cordova, K. Ohmori, and T. Rudelius, ´ *Generalized Symmetry Breaking Scales and Weak Gravity Conjectures*, arXiv:2202.05866.
- <span id="page-16-5"></span>[118] G. Arias-Tamargo and D. Rodriguez-Gomez, *Non-Invertible Symmetries from Discrete Gauging and Completeness of the Spectrum*, arXiv:2204.07523.
- <span id="page-16-6"></span>[119] U. Grimm and G. M. Schutz, *The Spin 1/2 XXZ Heisenberg chain, the quantum algebra U(q)[sl(2)], and duality transformations for minimal models*, *J. Statist. Phys.* 71 (1993) 921–964, [hep-th/0111083].
- [120] A. Feiguin, S. Trebst, A. W. W. Ludwig, M. Troyer, A. Kitaev, Z. Wang, and M. H. Freedman, *Interacting anyons in topological quantum liquids: The golden chain*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 98 (2007), no. 16 160409, [cond-mat/0612341].
- [121] M. Hauru, G. Evenbly, W. W. Ho, D. Gaiotto, and G. Vidal, *Topological conformal defects with tensor networks*, *Phys. Rev. B* 94 (2016), no. 11 115125, [arXiv:1512.03846].
- [122] D. Aasen, R. S. K. Mong, and P. Fendley, *Topological Defects on the Lattice I: The Ising model*, *J. Phys. A* 49 (2016), no. 35 354001, [arXiv:1601.07185].
- [123] M. Buican and A. Gromov, *Anyonic Chains, Topological Defects, and Conformal Field Theory*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 356 (2017), no. 3 1017–1056, [arXiv:1701.02800].
- [124] D. Aasen, P. Fendley, and R. S. K. Mong, *Topological Defects on the Lattice: Dualities and Degeneracies*, arXiv:2008.08598.
- <span id="page-16-7"></span>[125] K. Inamura, *On lattice models of gapped phases with fusion category symmetries*, arXiv:2110.12882.
- <span id="page-16-8"></span>[126] T.-C. Huang, Y.-H. Lin, K. Ohmori, Y. Tachikawa, and M. Tezuka, *Numerical evidence for a Haagerup conformal field theory*, arXiv:2110.03008.

- [127] R. Vanhove, L. Lootens, M. Van Damme, R. Wolf, T. Osborne, J. Haegeman, and F. Verstraete, *A critical lattice model for a Haagerup conformal field theory*, arXiv:2110.03532.
- <span id="page-17-0"></span>[128] Y. Liu, Y. Zou, and S. Ryu, *Operator fusion from wavefunction overlaps: Universal finite-size corrections and application to Haagerup model*, arXiv:2203.14992.
- <span id="page-17-1"></span>[129] W. Ji and X.-G. Wen, *Categorical symmetry and noninvertible anomaly in symmetry-breaking and topological phase transitions*, *Phys. Rev. Res.* 2 (2020), no. 3 033417, [arXiv:1912.13492].
- <span id="page-17-2"></span>[130] A. Paramekanti, L. Balents, and M. P. A. Fisher, *Ring exchange, the exciton bose liquid, and bosonization in two dimensions*, *Phys. Rev. B* 66 (Aug, 2002) 054526.
- <span id="page-17-3"></span>[131] C. Chamon, *Quantum glassiness in strongly correlated clean systems: An example of topological overprotection*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 94 (Jan, 2005) 040402.
- [132] J. Haah, *Local stabilizer codes in three dimensions without string logical operators*, *Phys. Rev. A* 83 (Apr, 2011) 042330.
- <span id="page-17-4"></span>[133] S. Vijay, J. Haah, and L. Fu, *Fracton Topological Order, Generalized Lattice Gauge Theory and Duality*, *Phys. Rev. B* 94 (2016), no. 23 235157, [arXiv:1603.04442].
- <span id="page-17-5"></span>[134] R. M. Nandkishore and M. Hermele, *Fractons*, *Ann. Rev. Condensed Matter Phys.* 10 (2019) 295–313, [arXiv:1803.11196].
- [135] M. Pretko, X. Chen, and Y. You, *Fracton Phases of Matter*, *Int. J. Mod. Phys. A* 35 (2020), no. 06 2030003, [arXiv:2001.01722].
- <span id="page-17-6"></span>[136] K. T. Grosvenor, C. Hoyos, F. Pena Benitez, and P. Sur ˜ owka, ´ *Space-dependent symmetries and fractons*, arXiv:2112.00531.
- <span id="page-17-7"></span>[137] T. Brauner, S. A. Hartnoll, P. Kovtun, H. Liu, M. Mezei, A. Nicolis, R. Penco, S.-H. Shao, and D. T. Son, *Snowmass White Paper: Effective Field Theories for Condensed Matter Systems*, in *2022 Snowmass Summer Study*, 3, 2022. arXiv:2203.10110.
- <span id="page-17-8"></span>[138] N. Seiberg, *Field Theories With a Vector Global Symmetry*, *SciPost Phys.* 8 (2020), no. 4 050, [arXiv:1909.10544].
- <span id="page-17-9"></span>[139] M. Qi, L. Radzihovsky, and M. Hermele, *Fracton phases via exotic higher-form symmetry-breaking*, *Annals Phys.* 424 (2021) 168360, [arXiv:2010.02254].
- <span id="page-17-10"></span>[140] C. D. Batista and Z. Nussinov, *Generalized Elitzur's theorem and dimensional reduction*, *Phys. Rev. B* 72 (2005) 045137, [cond-mat/0410599].
- [141] D. A. Johnston, M. Mueller, and W. Janke, *Plaquette Ising models, degeneracy and scaling*, *European Physical Journal Special Topics* 226 (Mar., 2017) [arXiv:1612.00060].
- <span id="page-17-12"></span>[142] N. Seiberg and S.-H. Shao, *Exotic Symmetries, Duality, and Fractons in 2+1-Dimensional Quantum Field Theory*, *SciPost Phys.* 10 (2021), no. 2 027, [arXiv:2003.10466].
- [143] N. Seiberg and S.-H. Shao, *Exotic U*(1) *Symmetries, Duality, and Fractons in 3+1-Dimensional Quantum Field Theory*, *SciPost Phys.* 9 (2020), no. 4 046, [arXiv:2004.00015].
- <span id="page-17-11"></span>[144] N. Seiberg and S.-H. Shao, *Exotic* Z*<sup>N</sup> symmetries, duality, and fractons in 3+1-dimensional quantum field theory*, *SciPost Phys.* 10 (2021), no. 1 003, [arXiv:2004.06115].

- <span id="page-18-11"></span>[145] P. Gorantla, H. T. Lam, N. Seiberg, and S.-H. Shao, *Low-energy limit of some exotic lattice theories and UV/IR mixing*, *Phys. Rev. B* 104 (2021), no. 23 235116, [arXiv:2108.00020].
- <span id="page-18-0"></span>[146] J. Distler, A. Karch, and A. Raz, *Spontaneously Broken Subsystem Symmetries*, arXiv:2110.12611.
- <span id="page-18-1"></span>[147] P. Gorantla, H. T. Lam, N. Seiberg, and S.-H. Shao, *A modified Villain formulation of fractons and other exotic theories*, *J. Math. Phys.* 62 (2021), no. 10 102301, [arXiv:2103.01257].
- <span id="page-18-2"></span>[148] F. J. Burnell, T. Devakul, P. Gorantla, H. T. Lam, and S.-H. Shao, *Anomaly Inflow for Subsystem Symmetries*, arXiv:2110.09529.
- <span id="page-18-3"></span>[149] R. Raussendorf, C. Okay, D.-S. Wang, D. T. Stephen, and H. P. Nautrup, *Computationally universal phase of quantum matter*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 122 (Mar, 2019) 090501.
- [150] Y. You, T. Devakul, F. J. Burnell, and S. L. Sondhi, *Subsystem symmetry protected topological order*, *Phys. Rev. B* 98 (Jul, 2018) 035112.
- [151] Y. You, T. Devakul, F. J. Burnell, and S. L. Sondhi, *Symmetric Fracton Matter: Twisted and Enriched*, *Annals Phys.* 416 (2020) 168140, [arXiv:1805.09800].
- [152] T. Devakul, D. J. Williamson, and Y. You, *Classification of subsystem symmetry-protected topological phases*, *Phys. Rev. B* 98 (2018), no. 23 235121, [arXiv:1808.05300].
- [153] D. T. Stephen, H. P. Nautrup, J. Bermejo-Vega, J. Eisert, and R. Raussendorf, *Subsystem symmetries, quantum cellular automata, and computational phases of quantum matter*, *Quantum* 3 (May, 2019) 142.
- <span id="page-18-4"></span>[154] T. Devakul, W. Shirley, and J. Wang, *Strong planar subsystem symmetry-protected topological phases and their dual fracton orders*, *Phys. Rev. Res.* 2 (2020), no. 1 012059, [arXiv:1910.01630].
- <span id="page-18-5"></span>[155] S. Yamaguchi, *Gapless edge modes in (4+1)-dimensional topologically massive tensor gauge theory and anomaly inflow for subsystem symmetry*, arXiv:2110.12861.
- <span id="page-18-6"></span>[156] D. T. Stephen, A. Dua, J. Garre-Rubio, D. J. Williamson, and M. Hermele, *Fractionalization of subsystem symmetries in two dimensions*, arXiv:2203.13244.
- <span id="page-18-7"></span>[157] D. J. Williamson, *Fractal symmetries: Ungauging the cubic code*, *Phys. Rev. B* 94 (2016), no. 15 155128, [arXiv:1603.05182].
- <span id="page-18-10"></span>[158] K. Slagle and Y. B. Kim, *Quantum Field Theory of X-Cube Fracton Topological Order and Robust Degeneracy from Geometry*, *Phys. Rev. B* 96 (2017), no. 19 195139, [arXiv:1708.04619].
- [159] W. Shirley, K. Slagle, and X. Chen, *Foliated fracton order from gauging subsystem symmetries*, *SciPost Phys.* 6 (2019), no. 4 041, [arXiv:1806.08679].
- <span id="page-18-8"></span>[160] A. Gromov, *Towards classification of Fracton phases: the multipole algebra*, *Phys. Rev. X* 9 (2019), no. 3 031035, [arXiv:1812.05104].
- <span id="page-18-9"></span>[161] P. Gorantla, H. T. Lam, N. Seiberg, and S.-H. Shao, *fcc lattice, checkerboards, fractons, and quantum field theory*, *Phys. Rev. B* 103 (2021), no. 20 205116, [arXiv:2010.16414].

- <span id="page-19-0"></span>[162] Z.-C. Gu and X.-G. Wen, *A Lattice bosonic model as a quantum theory of gravity*, gr-qc/0606100.
- [163] C. Xu, *Gapless bosonic excitation without symmetry breaking: An algebraic spin liquid with soft gravitons*, *Physical Review B* 74 (Dec, 2006) [cond-mat/0609595].
- [164] S. Pankov, R. Moessner, and S. L. Sondhi, *Resonating singlet valence plaquettes*, *Physical Review B* 76 (Sep, 2007) [arXiv:0705.0846].
- [165] C. Xu and C. Wu, *Resonating plaquette phases in su(4) heisenberg antiferromagnet*, *Physical Review B* 77 (Apr, 2008) [arXiv:0801.0744].
- [166] Z.-C. Gu and X.-G. Wen, *Emergence of helicity +- 2 modes (gravitons) from qbit models*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 863 (2012) 90–129, [arXiv:0907.1203].
- [167] A. Rasmussen, Y.-Z. You, and C. Xu, *Stable Gapless Bose Liquid Phases without any Symmetry*, *arXiv e-prints* (Jan., 2016) arXiv:1601.08235, [arXiv:1601.08235].
- [168] M. Pretko, *Subdimensional Particle Structure of Higher Rank U(1) Spin Liquids*, *Phys. Rev. B* 95 (2017), no. 11 115139, [arXiv:1604.05329].
- [169] M. Pretko, *Generalized Electromagnetism of Subdimensional Particles: A Spin Liquid Story*, *Phys. Rev. B* 96 (2017), no. 3 035119, [arXiv:1606.08857].
- <span id="page-19-1"></span>[170] A. Prem, M. Pretko, and R. Nandkishore, *Emergent Phases of Fractonic Matter*, *Phys. Rev. B* 97 (2018), no. 8 085116, [arXiv:1709.09673].
- <span id="page-19-2"></span>[171] M. Pretko and L. Radzihovsky, *Symmetry-Enriched Fracton Phases from Supersolid Duality*, *Phys.Rev.Lett.* 121 (Dec., 2018) 235301, [arXiv:1808.05616].
- [172] H. Ma and M. Pretko, *Higher-rank deconfined quantum criticality at the Lifshitz transition and the exciton Bose condensate*, *Phys.Rev.B* 98 (Sept., 2018) 125105, [arXiv:1803.04980].
- [173] D. Bulmash and M. Barkeshli, *The Higgs Mechanism in Higher-Rank Symmetric U*(1) *Gauge Theories*, *Phys. Rev. B* 97 (2018), no. 23 235112, [arXiv:1802.10099].
- [174] H. Ma, M. Hermele, and X. Chen, *Fracton topological order from the Higgs and partial-confinement mechanisms of rank-two gauge theory*, *Phys.Rev.B* 98 (July, 2018) 035111, [arXiv:1802.10108].
- [175] K. Slagle, A. Prem, and M. Pretko, *Symmetric Tensor Gauge Theories on Curved Spaces*, *Annals Phys.* 410 (2019) 167910, [arXiv:1807.00827].
- [176] M. Pretko, *The Fracton Gauge Principle*, *Phys. Rev. B* 98 (2018), no. 11 115134, [arXiv:1807.11479].
- [177] D. J. Williamson, Z. Bi, and M. Cheng, *Fractonic Matter in Symmetry-Enriched U(1) Gauge Theory*, *Phys. Rev. B* 100 (2019), no. 12 125150, [arXiv:1809.10275].
- <span id="page-19-3"></span>[178] Y. You, T. Devakul, S. L. Sondhi, and F. J. Burnell, *Fractonic Chern-Simons and BF theories*, *Physical Review Research* 2 (May, 2020) 023249, [arXiv:1904.11530].

- <span id="page-20-0"></span>[179] Y. You, F. J. Burnell, and T. L. Hughes, *Multipolar Topological Field Theories: Bridging Higher Order Topological Insulators and Fractons*, *Phys. Rev. B* 103 (2021), no. 24 245128, [arXiv:1909.05868].
- [180] A. Gromov, *A Duality Between U*(1) *Haah Code and 3D Smectic A Phase*, arXiv:2002.11817.
- <span id="page-20-1"></span>[181] A. Gromov, A. Lucas, and R. M. Nandkishore, *Fracton hydrodynamics*, *Phys. Rev. Res.* 2 (2020), no. 3 033124, [arXiv:2003.09429].
- <span id="page-20-2"></span>[182] K. Slagle, *Foliated Quantum Field Theory of Fracton Order*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 126 (2021), no. 10 101603, [arXiv:2008.03852].
- [183] A. Karch and A. Raz, *Reduced Conformal Symmetry*, *JHEP* 04 (2021) 182, [arXiv:2009.12308].
- [184] S. Yamaguchi, *Supersymmetric quantum field theory with exotic symmetry in 3+1 dimensions and fermionic fracton phases*, *PTEP* 2021 (2021), no. 6 063B04, [arXiv:2102.04768].
- [185] H. Geng, S. Kachru, A. Karch, R. Nally, and B. C. Rayhaun, *Fractons and Exotic Symmetries from Branes*, *Fortsch. Phys.* 69 (2021), no. 11-12 2100133, [arXiv:2108.08322].
- <span id="page-20-10"></span>[186] P.-S. Hsin and K. Slagle, *Comments on foliated gauge theories and dualities in 3+1d*, *SciPost Phys.* 11 (2021), no. 2 032, [arXiv:2105.09363].
- [187] Y.-H. Du, U. Mehta, D. X. Nguyen, and D. T. Son, *Volume-preserving diffeomorphism as nonabelian higher-rank gauge symmetry*, arXiv:2103.09826.
- [188] L. Bidussi, J. Hartong, E. Have, J. Musaeus, and S. Prohazka, *Fractons, dipole symmetries and curved spacetime*, arXiv:2111.03668.
- [189] A. Jain and K. Jensen, *Fractons in curved space*, arXiv:2111.03973.
- <span id="page-20-4"></span>[190] P. Gorantla, H. T. Lam, N. Seiberg, and S.-H. Shao, *Global Dipole Symmetry, Compact Lifshitz Theory, Tensor Gauge Theory, and Fractons*, arXiv:2201.10589.
- <span id="page-20-3"></span>[191] A. Perez and S. Prohazka, ´ *Asymptotic symmetries and soft charges of fractons*, arXiv:2203.02817.
- <span id="page-20-5"></span>[192] Y. You, J. Bibo, T. L. Hughes, and F. Pollmann, *Fractonic critical point proximate to a higher-order topological insulator: How does UV blend with IR?*, arXiv:2101.01724.
- [193] Z. Zhou, X.-F. Zhang, F. Pollmann, and Y. You, *Fractal Quantum Phase Transitions: Critical Phenomena Beyond Renormalization*, arXiv:2105.05851.
- <span id="page-20-6"></span>[194] Y. You and R. Moessner, *Fractonic plaquette-dimer liquid beyond renormalization*, arXiv:2106.07664.
- <span id="page-20-7"></span>[195] S. Minwalla, M. Van Raamsdonk, and N. Seiberg, *Noncommutative perturbative dynamics*, *JHEP* 02 (2000) 020, [hep-th/9912072].
- <span id="page-20-8"></span>[196] D. Bulmash and M. Barkeshli, *Generalized U*(1) *Gauge Field Theories and Fractal Dynamics*, arXiv:1806.01855.
- <span id="page-20-9"></span>[197] K. Slagle, D. Aasen, and D. Williamson, *Foliated Field Theory and String-Membrane-Net Condensation Picture of Fracton Order*, *SciPost Phys.* 6 (2019), no. 4 043, [arXiv:1812.01613].

- <span id="page-21-0"></span>[198] P. Gorantla, H. T. Lam, N. Seiberg, and S.-H. Shao, *More Exotic Field Theories in 3+1 Dimensions*, *SciPost Phys.* 9 (2020) 073, [arXiv:2007.04904].
- <span id="page-21-1"></span>[199] D. Aasen, D. Bulmash, A. Prem, K. Slagle, and D. J. Williamson, *Topological Defect Networks for Fractons of all Types*, *Phys. Rev. Res.* 2 (2020) 043165, [arXiv:2002.05166].
- <span id="page-21-2"></span>[200] T. Rudelius, N. Seiberg, and S.-H. Shao, *Fractons with Twisted Boundary Conditions and Their Symmetries*, *Phys. Rev. B* 103 (2021), no. 19 195113, [arXiv:2012.11592].
- <span id="page-21-3"></span>[201] J. Distler, M. Jafry, A. Karch, and A. Raz, *Interacting Fractons in 2+1-Dimensional Quantum Field Theory*, arXiv:2112.05726.
- <span id="page-21-4"></span>[202] E. Lake, *RG and Stability in the Exciton Bose Liquid*, arXiv:2110.02986.
- <span id="page-21-5"></span>[203] S.-H. Shao, *Symmetries and their generalizations in topological phases of matter*, *Strings 2021 Review Talk*.
- <span id="page-21-6"></span>[204] Y. Frishman, A. Schwimmer, T. Banks, and S. Yankielowicz, *The Axial Anomaly and the Bound State Spectrum in Confining Theories*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 177 (1981) 157–171.
- <span id="page-21-7"></span>[205] S. R. Coleman and B. Grossman, *'t Hooft's Consistency Condition as a Consequence of Analyticity and Unitarity*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 203 (1982) 205–220.
- <span id="page-21-8"></span>[206] C. G. Callan, Jr. and J. A. Harvey, *Anomalies and Fermion Zero Modes on Strings and Domain Walls*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 250 (1985) 427–436.
- <span id="page-21-9"></span>[207] L. D. Faddeev and S. L. Shatashvili, *Algebraic and Hamiltonian Methods in the Theory of Nonabelian Anomalies*, *Teor. Mat. Fiz.* 60 (1984) 206–217.
- <span id="page-21-10"></span>[208] D. Freed, J. A. Harvey, R. Minasian, and G. W. Moore, *Gravitational anomaly cancellation for M theory five-branes*, *Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.* 2 (1998) 601–618, [hep-th/9803205].
- <span id="page-21-11"></span>[209] J. A. Harvey, *TASI 2003 lectures on anomalies*, 9, 2005. hep-th/0509097.
- <span id="page-21-13"></span>[210] E. Witten, *Global Aspects of Current Algebra*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 223 (1983) 422–432.
- <span id="page-21-14"></span>[211] E. Witten, *Current Algebra, Baryons, and Quark Confinement*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 223 (1983) 433–444.
- <span id="page-21-15"></span>[212] E. Witten, *Nonabelian Bosonization in Two-Dimensions*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 92 (1984) 455–472.
- <span id="page-21-16"></span>[213] D. B. Kaplan, *A Method for simulating chiral fermions on the lattice*, *Phys. Lett. B* 288 (1992) 342–347, [hep-lat/9206013].
- <span id="page-21-12"></span>[214] R. Thorngren, *Framed Wilson Operators, Fermionic Strings, and Gravitational Anomaly in 4d*, *JHEP* 02 (2015) 152, [arXiv:1404.4385].
- [215] K. Ohmori, H. Shimizu, Y. Tachikawa, and K. Yonekura, *Anomaly polynomial of general 6d SCFTs*, *PTEP* 2014 (2014), no. 10 103B07, [arXiv:1408.5572].
- [216] J. Wang, X.-G. Wen, and E. Witten, *A New SU(2) Anomaly*, *J. Math. Phys.* 60 (2019), no. 5 052301, [arXiv:1810.00844].
- [217] Y. Lee, K. Ohmori, and Y. Tachikawa, *Revisiting Wess-Zumino-Witten terms*, *SciPost Phys.* 10 (2021), no. 3 061, [arXiv:2009.00033].

- [218] Y. Lee and Y. Tachikawa, *Some comments on 6D global gauge anomalies*, *PTEP* 2021 (2021), no. 8 08B103, [arXiv:2012.11622].
- [219] M. M. Anber and E. Poppitz, *Generalized 't Hooft anomalies on non-spin manifolds*, *JHEP* 04 (2020) 097, [arXiv:2002.02037].
- <span id="page-22-0"></span>[220] Y. Lee and K. Yonekura, *Global anomalies in 8d supergravity*, arXiv:2203.12631.
- <span id="page-22-1"></span>[221] A. Kapustin and R. Thorngren, *Anomalies of discrete symmetries in three dimensions and group cohomology*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 112 (2014), no. 23 231602, [arXiv:1403.0617].
- [222] A. Kapustin and R. Thorngren, *Anomalies of discrete symmetries in various dimensions and group cohomology*, arXiv:1404.3230.
- [223] A. Kapustin, R. Thorngren, A. Turzillo, and Z. Wang, *Fermionic Symmetry Protected Topological Phases and Cobordisms*, *JHEP* 12 (2015) 052, [arXiv:1406.7329].
- [224] J. C. Wang, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen, *Field theory representation of gauge-gravity symmetry-protected topological invariants, group cohomology and beyond*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 114 (2015), no. 3 031601, [arXiv:1405.7689].
- <span id="page-22-2"></span>[225] D. Gaiotto and A. Kapustin, *Spin TQFTs and fermionic phases of matter*, *Int. J. Mod. Phys. A* 31 (2016), no. 28n29 1645044, [arXiv:1505.05856].
- <span id="page-22-3"></span>[226] M. Guo, P. Putrov, and J. Wang, *Time reversal, SU(N) Yang–Mills and cobordisms: Interacting topological superconductors/insulators and quantum spin liquids in 3+1D*, *Annals Phys.* 394 (2018) 244–293, [arXiv:1711.11587].
- [227] M. Guo, K. Ohmori, P. Putrov, Z. Wan, and J. Wang, *Fermionic Finite-Group Gauge Theories and Interacting Symmetric/Crystalline Orders via Cobordisms*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 376 (2020), no. 2 1073–1154, [arXiv:1812.11959].
- [228] D. Tong and C. Turner, *Notes on 8 Majorana Fermions*, *SciPost Phys. Lect. Notes* 14 (2020) 1, [arXiv:1906.07199].
- <span id="page-22-7"></span>[229] A. Grigoletto and P. Putrov, *Spin-cobordisms, surgeries and fermionic modular bootstrap*, arXiv:2106.16247.
- <span id="page-22-4"></span>[230] P. B. Smith, A. Karasik, N. Lohitsiri, and D. Tong, *On discrete anomalies in chiral gauge theories*, *JHEP* 01 (2022) 112, [arXiv:2106.06402].
- <span id="page-22-5"></span>[231] C.-T. Hsieh, Y. Tachikawa, and K. Yonekura, *Anomaly Inflow and p-Form Gauge Theories*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 391 (2022), no. 2 495–608, [arXiv:2003.11550].
- <span id="page-22-6"></span>[232] Y. Kikuchi and Y. Tanizaki, *Global inconsistency, 't Hooft anomaly, and level crossing in quantum mechanics*, *PTEP* 2017 (2017), no. 11 113B05, [arXiv:1708.01962].
- [233] R. Thorngren, *Topological Terms and Phases of Sigma Models*, arXiv:1710.02545.
- [234] Y. Tachikawa and K. Yonekura, *Anomalies involving the space of couplings and the Zamolodchikov metric*, *JHEP* 12 (2017) 140, [arXiv:1710.03934].

- [235] Y. Tanizaki and T. Sulejmanpasic, *Anomaly and global inconsistency matching:* θ*-angles, SU*(3)/*U*(1) <sup>2</sup> *nonlinear sigma model, SU*(3) *chains and its generalizations*, *Phys. Rev. B* 98 (2018), no. 11 115126, [arXiv:1805.11423].
- [236] N. Seiberg, Y. Tachikawa, and K. Yonekura, *Anomalies of Duality Groups and Extended Conformal Manifolds*, *PTEP* 2018 (2018), no. 7 073B04, [arXiv:1803.07366].
- [237] C.-T. Hsieh, Y. Tachikawa, and K. Yonekura, *Anomaly of the Electromagnetic Duality of Maxwell Theory*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 123 (2019), no. 16 161601, [arXiv:1905.08943].
- [238] C. Cordova, D. S. Freed, H. T. Lam, and N. Seiberg, ´ *Anomalies in the Space of Coupling Constants and Their Dynamical Applications I*, *SciPost Phys.* 8 (2020), no. 1 001, [arXiv:1905.09315].
- [239] C. Cordova, D. S. Freed, H. T. Lam, and N. Seiberg, ´ *Anomalies in the Space of Coupling Constants and Their Dynamical Applications II*, *SciPost Phys.* 8 (2020), no. 1 002, [arXiv:1905.13361].
- [240] P.-S. Hsin, A. Kapustin, and R. Thorngren, *Berry Phase in Quantum Field Theory: Diabolical Points and Boundary Phenomena*, *Phys. Rev. B* 102 (2020) 245113, [arXiv:2004.10758].
- <span id="page-23-0"></span>[241] Y. Choi and K. Ohmori, *Higher Berry Phase of Fermions and Index Theorem*, arXiv:2205.02188.
- <span id="page-23-1"></span>[242] A. Kapustin, *Symmetry Protected Topological Phases, Anomalies, and Cobordisms: Beyond Group Cohomology*, arXiv:1403.1467.
- [243] A. Kapustin, *Bosonic Topological Insulators and Paramagnets: a view from cobordisms*, arXiv:1404.6659.
- <span id="page-23-2"></span>[244] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, *Gapped Boundary Phases of Topological Insulators via Weak Coupling*, *PTEP* 2016 (2016), no. 12 12C101, [arXiv:1602.04251].
- <span id="page-23-3"></span>[245] Z. Wan and J. Wang, *Higher anomalies, higher symmetries, and cobordisms I: classification of higher-symmetry-protected topological states and their boundary fermionic/bosonic anomalies via a generalized cobordism theory*, *Ann. Math. Sci. Appl.* 4 (2019), no. 2 107–311, [arXiv:1812.11967].
- <span id="page-23-7"></span>[246] C. Cordova, K. Ohmori, S.-H. Shao, and F. Yan, ´ *Decorated* Z<sup>2</sup> *symmetry defects and their time-reversal anomalies*, *Phys. Rev. D* 102 (2020), no. 4 045019, [arXiv:1910.14046].
- [247] K. Yonekura, *General anomaly matching by Goldstone bosons*, *JHEP* 03 (2021) 057, [arXiv:2009.04692].
- [248] I. Hason, Z. Komargodski, and R. Thorngren, *Anomaly Matching in the Symmetry Broken Phase: Domain Walls, CPT, and the Smith Isomorphism*, *SciPost Phys.* 8 (2020), no. 4 062, [arXiv:1910.14039].
- <span id="page-23-4"></span>[249] R. Thorngren and Y. Wang, *Anomalous symmetries end at the boundary*, *JHEP* 09 (2021) 017, [arXiv:2012.15861].
- <span id="page-23-5"></span>[250] D. Delmastro, D. Gaiotto, and J. Gomis, *Global anomalies on the Hilbert space*, *JHEP* 11 (2021) 142, [arXiv:2101.02218].
- <span id="page-23-6"></span>[251] A. Cherman, T. Jacobson, and M. Neuzil, *Universal Deformations*, *SciPost Phys.* 12 (2022) 116, [arXiv:2111.00078].

- <span id="page-24-0"></span>[252] L. Alvarez-Gaume and P. H. Ginsparg, *The Structure of Gauge and Gravitational Anomalies*, *Annals Phys.* 161 (1985) 423. [Erratum: Annals Phys. 171, 233 (1986)].
- <span id="page-24-1"></span>[253] X.-z. Dai and D. S. Freed, *eta invariants and determinant lines*, *J. Math. Phys.* 35 (1994) 5155–5194, [hep-th/9405012]. [Erratum: J.Math.Phys. 42, 2343–2344 (2001)].
- <span id="page-24-2"></span>[254] K. Yonekura, *Dai-Freed theorem and topological phases of matter*, *JHEP* 09 (2016) 022, [arXiv:1607.01873].
- <span id="page-24-3"></span>[255] E. Witten and K. Yonekura, *Anomaly Inflow and the* η*-Invariant*, in *The Shoucheng Zhang Memorial Workshop*, 9, 2019. arXiv:1909.08775.
- <span id="page-24-4"></span>[256] E. Witten, *Anti-de Sitter space and holography*, *Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.* 2 (1998) 253–291, [hep-th/9802150].
- <span id="page-24-5"></span>[257] D. S. Freed, *Anomalies and Invertible Field Theories*, *Proc. Symp. Pure Math.* 88 (2014) 25–46, [arXiv:1404.7224].
- <span id="page-24-6"></span>[258] D. S. Freed, *Short-range entanglement and invertible field theories*, arXiv:1406.7278.
- <span id="page-24-7"></span>[259] K. Yonekura, *On the cobordism classification of symmetry protected topological phases*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 368 (2019), no. 3 1121–1173, [arXiv:1803.10796].
- <span id="page-24-8"></span>[260] M. Yamashita and K. Yonekura, *Differential models for the Anderson dual to bordism theories and invertible QFT's, I*, arXiv:2106.09270.
- <span id="page-24-9"></span>[261] D. S. Freed and C. Teleman, *Relative quantum field theory*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 326 (2014) 459–476, [arXiv:1212.1692].
- <span id="page-24-14"></span>[262] S. Elitzur, G. W. Moore, A. Schwimmer, and N. Seiberg, *Remarks on the Canonical Quantization of the Chern-Simons-Witten Theory*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 326 (1989) 108–134.
- <span id="page-24-15"></span>[263] E. Witten, *AdS / CFT correspondence and topological field theory*, *JHEP* 12 (1998) 012, [hep-th/9812012].
- <span id="page-24-16"></span>[264] S. Monnier, *The anomaly field theories of six-dimensional (2,0) superconformal theories*, *Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.* 22 (2018) 2035–2089, [arXiv:1706.01903].
- <span id="page-24-10"></span>[265] C. Cordova and K. Ohmori, ´ *Anomaly Obstructions to Symmetry Preserving Gapped Phases*, arXiv:1910.04962.
- <span id="page-24-11"></span>[266] C. Cordova and K. Ohmori, ´ *Anomaly Constraints on Gapped Phases with Discrete Chiral Symmetry*, *Phys. Rev. D* 102 (2020), no. 2 025011, [arXiv:1912.13069].
- <span id="page-24-12"></span>[267] N. Seiberg, *Electric - magnetic duality in supersymmetric nonAbelian gauge theories*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 435 (1995) 129–146, [hep-th/9411149].
- [268] K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg, *Duality, monopoles, dyons, confinement and oblique confinement in supersymmetric SO(N(c)) gauge theories*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 444 (1995) 125–160, [hep-th/9503179].
- <span id="page-24-13"></span>[269] K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg, *Lectures on supersymmetric gauge theories and electric-magnetic duality*, *Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl.* 45BC (1996) 1–28, [hep-th/9509066].

- <span id="page-25-0"></span>[270] Y. Tachikawa and K. Yonekura, *On time-reversal anomaly of 2+1d topological phases*, *PTEP* 2017 (2017), no. 3 033B04, [arXiv:1610.07010].
- <span id="page-25-11"></span>[271] Y. Tachikawa and K. Yonekura, *More on time-reversal anomaly of 2+1d topological phases*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 119 (2017), no. 11 111603, [arXiv:1611.01601].
- [272] F. J. Burnell, *Anyon condensation and its applications*, *Ann. Rev. Condensed Matter Phys.* 9 (2018) 307–327, [arXiv:1706.04940].
- <span id="page-25-1"></span>[273] P.-S. Hsin and N. Seiberg, *Level/rank Duality and Chern-Simons-Matter Theories*, *JHEP* 09 (2016) 095, [arXiv:1607.07457].
- <span id="page-25-2"></span>[274] Y. Lee and Y. Tachikawa, *A study of time reversal symmetry of abelian anyons*, *JHEP* 07 (2018) 090, [arXiv:1805.02738].
- <span id="page-25-3"></span>[275] D. Delmastro and J. Gomis, *Symmetries of Abelian Chern-Simons Theories and Arithmetic*, *JHEP* 03 (2021) 006, [arXiv:1904.12884].
- <span id="page-25-4"></span>[276] O. Aharony, *Baryons, monopoles and dualities in Chern-Simons-matter theories*, *JHEP* 02 (2016) 093, [arXiv:1512.00161].
- <span id="page-25-5"></span>[277] O. Aharony, F. Benini, P.-S. Hsin, and N. Seiberg, *Chern-Simons-matter dualities with SO and USp gauge groups*, *JHEP* 02 (2017) 072, [arXiv:1611.07874].
- [278] F. Benini, P.-S. Hsin, and N. Seiberg, *Comments on global symmetries, anomalies, and duality in (2 + 1)d*, *JHEP* 04 (2017) 135, [arXiv:1702.07035].
- <span id="page-25-8"></span>[279] C. Cordova, P.-S. Hsin, and N. Seiberg, ´ *Global Symmetries, Counterterms, and Duality in Chern-Simons Matter Theories with Orthogonal Gauge Groups*, *SciPost Phys.* 4 (2018), no. 4 021, [arXiv:1711.10008].
- [280] F. Benini, *Three-dimensional dualities with bosons and fermions*, *JHEP* 02 (2018) 068, [arXiv:1712.00020].
- <span id="page-25-9"></span>[281] C. Cordova, P.-S. Hsin, and N. Seiberg, ´ *Time-Reversal Symmetry, Anomalies, and Dualities in (2+1)d*, *SciPost Phys.* 5 (2018), no. 1 006, [arXiv:1712.08639].
- [282] F. Benini and S. Benvenuti, N *= 1 QED in 2 + 1 dimensions: dualities and enhanced symmetries*, *JHEP* 05 (2021) 176, [arXiv:1804.05707].
- <span id="page-25-10"></span>[283] C. Cordova, P.-S. Hsin, and K. Ohmori, ´ *Exceptional Chern-Simons-Matter Dualities*, *SciPost Phys.* 7 (2019), no. 4 056, [arXiv:1812.11705].
- <span id="page-25-6"></span>[284] V. Bashmakov, J. Gomis, Z. Komargodski, and A. Sharon, *Phases of* N = 1 *theories in 2 + 1 dimensions*, *JHEP* 07 (2018) 123, [arXiv:1802.10130].
- <span id="page-25-7"></span>[285] D. S. Freed, Z. Komargodski, and N. Seiberg, *The Sum Over Topological Sectors and* θ *in the 2+1-Dimensional* CP<sup>1</sup> σ*-Model*, *Commun. Math. Phys.* 362 (2018), no. 1 167–183, [arXiv:1707.05448].
- [286] Z. Komargodski and N. Seiberg, *A symmetry breaking scenario for QCD*3, *JHEP* 01 (2018) 109, [arXiv:1706.08755].

- [287] Z. Komargodski, A. Sharon, R. Thorngren, and X. Zhou, *Comments on Abelian Higgs Models and Persistent Order*, *SciPost Phys.* 6 (2019), no. 1 003, [arXiv:1705.04786].
- <span id="page-26-0"></span>[288] J. Gomis, Z. Komargodski, and N. Seiberg, *Phases Of Adjoint QCD*<sup>3</sup> *And Dualities*, *SciPost Phys.* 5 (2018), no. 1 007, [arXiv:1710.03258].
- <span id="page-26-1"></span>[289] Z. Komargodski, T. Sulejmanpasic, and M. Unsal, ¨ *Walls, anomalies, and deconfinement in quantum antiferromagnets*, *Phys. Rev. B* 97 (2018), no. 5 054418, [arXiv:1706.05731].
- <span id="page-26-2"></span>[290] C. Choi, D. Delmastro, J. Gomis, and Z. Komargodski, *Dynamics of QCD*<sup>3</sup> *with Rank-Two Quarks And Duality*, *JHEP* 03 (2020) 078, [arXiv:1810.07720].
- <span id="page-26-3"></span>[291] A. Armoni, T. T. Dumitrescu, G. Festuccia, and Z. Komargodski, *Metastable vacua in large-N QCD*3, *JHEP* 01 (2020) 004, [arXiv:1905.01797].
- <span id="page-26-4"></span>[292] P. Putrov, J. Wang, and S.-T. Yau, *Braiding Statistics and Link Invariants of Bosonic/Fermionic Topological Quantum Matter in 2+1 and 3+1 dimensions*, *Annals Phys.* 384 (2017) 254–287, [arXiv:1612.09298].
- [293] H. Shimizu and K. Yonekura, *Anomaly constraints on deconfinement and chiral phase transition*, *Phys. Rev. D* 97 (2018), no. 10 105011, [arXiv:1706.06104].
- [294] A. Cherman, S. Sen, M. Unsal, M. L. Wagman, and L. G. Yaffe, *Order parameters and color-flavor center symmetry in QCD*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 119 (2017), no. 22 222001, [arXiv:1706.05385].
- [295] I. n. Garc´ıa-Etxebarria and M. Montero, *Dai-Freed anomalies in particle physics*, *JHEP* 08 (2019) 003, [arXiv:1808.00009].
- [296] K. Aitken, A. Cherman, and M. Unsal, ¨ *Dihedral symmetry in SU*(*N*) *Yang-Mills theory*, *Phys. Rev. D* 100 (2019), no. 8 085004, [arXiv:1804.05845].
- [297] C. Cordova and T. T. Dumitrescu, ´ *Candidate Phases for SU(2) Adjoint QCD*<sup>4</sup> *with Two Flavors from* N = 2 *Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory*, arXiv:1806.09592.
- <span id="page-26-5"></span>[298] Z. Wan, J. Wang, and Y. Zheng, *New higher anomalies, SU(N) Yang–Mills gauge theory and* CPN−1 *sigma model*, *Annals Phys.* 414 (2020) 168074, [arXiv:1812.11968].
- <span id="page-26-6"></span>[299] K. Yonekura, *Anomaly matching in QCD thermal phase transition*, *JHEP* 05 (2019) 062, [arXiv:1901.08188].
- [300] J. Wang, Y.-Z. You, and Y. Zheng, *Gauge enhanced quantum criticality and time reversal deconfined domain wall: SU(2) Yang-Mills dynamics with topological terms*, *Phys. Rev. Res.* 2 (2020), no. 1 013189, [arXiv:1910.14664].
- [301] Z. Wan, J. Wang, and Y. Zheng, *Higher anomalies, higher symmetries, and cobordisms II: Lorentz symmetry extension and enriched bosonic / fermionic quantum gauge theory*, *Ann. Math. Sci. Appl.* 05 (2020), no. 2 171–257, [arXiv:1912.13504].
- [302] Z. Wan and J. Wang, *Higher anomalies, higher symmetries, and cobordisms III: QCD matter phases anew*, *Nucl. Phys. B* 957 (2020) 115016, [arXiv:1912.13514].
- [303] Z. Wan and J. Wang, *Beyond Standard Models and Grand Unifications: Anomalies, Topological Terms, and Dynamical Constraints via Cobordisms*, *JHEP* 07 (2020) 062, [arXiv:1910.14668].

- <span id="page-27-0"></span>[304] A. Cherman, T. Jacobson, S. Sen, and L. G. Yaffe, *Higgs-confinement phase transitions with fundamental representation matter*, *Phys. Rev. D* 102 (2020), no. 10 105021, [arXiv:2007.08539].
- <span id="page-27-1"></span>[305] E. Poppitz and F. D. Wandler, *Topological terms and anomaly matching in effective field theories on* R <sup>3</sup> ×S 1 *:. Part I. Abelian symmetries and intermediate scales*, *JHEP* 01 (2021) 091, [arXiv:2009.14667].
- [306] M. M. Anber and S. Baker, *Natural inflation, strong dynamics, and the role of generalized anomalies*, *Phys. Rev. D* 102 (2020), no. 10 103515, [arXiv:2008.05491].
- [307] S. S. Razamat and D. Tong, *Gapped Chiral Fermions*, *Phys. Rev. X* 11 (2021), no. 1 011063, [arXiv:2009.05037].
- [308] M. M. Anber, *Condensates and anomaly cascade in vector-like theories*, *JHEP* 03 (2021) 191, [arXiv:2101.04132].
- [309] M. M. Anber, S. Hong, and M. Son, *New anomalies, TQFTs, and confinement in bosonic chiral gauge theories*, *JHEP* 02 (2022) 062, [arXiv:2109.03245].
- <span id="page-27-2"></span>[310] M. M. Anber and E. Poppitz, *Nonperturbative effects in the Standard Model with gauged 1-form symmetry*, *JHEP* 12 (2021) 055, [arXiv:2110.02981].
- <span id="page-27-3"></span>[311] M. Unsal, ¨ *TQFT at work for IR-renormalons, resurgence and Lefschetz decomposition*, arXiv:2106.14971.
- <span id="page-27-4"></span>[312] A. A. Cox, E. Poppitz, and F. D. Wandler, *The mixed 0-form/1-form anomaly in Hilbert space: pouring the new wine into old bottles*, *JHEP* 10 (2021) 069, [arXiv:2106.11442].
- <span id="page-27-5"></span>[313] L. Bhardwaj, S. Giacomelli, M. Hubner, and S. Sch ¨ afer-Nameki, ¨ *Relative Defects in Relative Theories: Trapped Higher-Form Symmetries and Irregular Punctures in Class S*, arXiv:2201.00018.
- [314] J. Wang, Z. Wan, and Y.-Z. You, *Cobordism and Deformation Class of the Standard Model*, arXiv:2112.14765.
- [315] Y. Tanizaki and M. Unsal, ¨ *Center vortex and confinement in Yang-Mills theory and QCD with anomaly-preserving compactifications*, *PTEP* 2022 (2022) 04, [arXiv:2201.06166].
- <span id="page-27-6"></span>[316] J. Wang and Y.-Z. You, *Symmetric Mass Generation*, arXiv:2204.14271.
- <span id="page-27-7"></span>[317] D. Gaiotto, Z. Komargodski, and N. Seiberg, *Time-reversal breaking in QCD*4*, walls, and dualities in 2 + 1 dimensions*, *JHEP* 01 (2018) 110, [arXiv:1708.06806].
- [318] V. Bashmakov, F. Benini, S. Benvenuti, and M. Bertolini, *Living on the walls of super-QCD*, *SciPost Phys.* 6 (2019), no. 4 044, [arXiv:1812.04645].
- [319] M. M. Anber and E. Poppitz, *Domain walls in high-T SU(N) super Yang-Mills theory and QCD(adj)*, *JHEP* 05 (2019) 151, [arXiv:1811.10642].
- [320] A. A. Cox, E. Poppitz, and S. S. Y. Wong, *Domain walls and deconfinement: a semiclassical picture of discrete anomaly inflow*, *JHEP* 12 (2019) 011, [arXiv:1909.10979].

- [321] M. M. Anber and E. Poppitz, *Deconfinement on axion domain walls*, *JHEP* 03 (2020) 124, [arXiv:2001.03631].
- <span id="page-28-0"></span>[322] D. Delmastro and J. Gomis, *Domain walls in 4d*N *= 1 SYM*, *JHEP* 03 (2021) 259, [arXiv:2004.11395].
- <span id="page-28-1"></span>[323] I. n. Garc´ıa-Etxebarria, H. Hayashi, K. Ohmori, Y. Tachikawa, and K. Yonekura, *8d gauge anomalies and the topological Green-Schwarz mechanism*, *JHEP* 11 (2017) 177, [arXiv:1710.04218].
- [324] J. Wang, X.-G. Wen, and E. Witten, *Symmetric Gapped Interfaces of SPT and SET States: Systematic Constructions*, *Phys. Rev. X* 8 (2018), no. 3 031048, [arXiv:1705.06728].
- [325] Z. Wan and J. Wang, *Adjoint QCD*4*, Deconfined Critical Phenomena, Symmetry-Enriched Topological Quantum Field Theory, and Higher Symmetry-Extension*, *Phys. Rev. D* 99 (2019), no. 6 065013, [arXiv:1812.11955].
- [326] J. Wang, K. Ohmori, P. Putrov, Y. Zheng, Z. Wan, M. Guo, H. Lin, P. Gao, and S.-T. Yau, *Tunneling Topological Vacua via Extended Operators: (Spin-)TQFT Spectra and Boundary Deconfinement in Various Dimensions*, *PTEP* 2018 (2018), no. 5 053A01, [arXiv:1801.05416].
- <span id="page-28-2"></span>[327] R. Kobayashi, K. Ohmori, and Y. Tachikawa, *On gapped boundaries for SPT phases beyond group cohomology*, *JHEP* 11 (2019) 131, [arXiv:1905.05391].
- <span id="page-28-3"></span>[328] R. Thorngren, *Topological quantum field theory, symmetry breaking, and finite gauge theory in 3+1D*, *Phys. Rev. B* 101 (2020), no. 24 245160, [arXiv:2001.11938].
- <span id="page-28-4"></span>[329] F. Albertini, M. Del Zotto, I. n. Garc´ıa Etxebarria, and S. S. Hosseini, *Higher Form Symmetries and M-theory*, *JHEP* 12 (2020) 203, [arXiv:2005.12831].
- <span id="page-28-5"></span>[330] F. Apruzzi, M. van Beest, D. S. W. Gould, and S. Schafer-Nameki, ¨ *Holography, 1-form symmetries, and confinement*, *Phys. Rev. D* 104 (2021), no. 6 066005, [arXiv:2104.12764].
- <span id="page-28-6"></span>[331] M. Hubner, D. R. Morrison, S. Schafer-Nameki, and Y.-N. Wang, *Generalized Symmetries in F-theory and the Topology of Elliptic Fibrations*, arXiv:2203.10022.
- <span id="page-28-7"></span>[332] J. J. Heckman, C. Lawrie, L. Lin, H. Y. Zhang, and G. Zoccarato, *6d SCFTs, Center-Flavor Symmetries, and Stiefel–Whitney Compactifications*, arXiv:2205.03411.
- <span id="page-28-8"></span>[333] C. Cordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, and K. Intriligator, ´ *Multiplets of Superconformal Symmetry in Diverse Dimensions*, *JHEP* 03 (2019) 163, [arXiv:1612.00809].
- <span id="page-28-9"></span>[334] I. Bah and E. Nardoni, *Structure of Anomalies of 4d SCFTs from M5-branes, and Anomaly Inflow*, *JHEP* 03 (2019) 024, [arXiv:1803.00136].
- [335] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, R. Minasian, and E. Nardoni, *Class* S *Anomalies from M-theory Inflow*, *Phys. Rev. D* 99 (2019), no. 8 086020, [arXiv:1812.04016].
- <span id="page-28-10"></span>[336] I. Bah, F. Bonetti, R. Minasian, and P. Weck, *Anomaly Inflow Methods for SCFT Constructions in Type IIB*, *JHEP* 02 (2021) 116, [arXiv:2002.10466].
- <span id="page-28-11"></span>[337] L. Bhardwaj, M. Hubner, and S. Schafer-Nameki, *1-form Symmetries of 4d N=2 Class S Theories*, *SciPost Phys.* 11 (2021) 096, [arXiv:2102.01693].

- [338] L. Bhardwaj, M. Hubner, and S. Schafer-Nameki, *Liberating Confinement from Lagrangians: 1-form Symmetries and Lines in 4d N=1 from 6d N=(2,0)*, *SciPost Phys.* 12 (2022) 040, [arXiv:2106.10265].
- <span id="page-29-0"></span>[339] L. Bhardwaj, *Global Form of Flavor Symmetry Groups in 4d N=2 Theories of Class S*, arXiv:2105.08730.
- <span id="page-29-1"></span>[340] C. Cordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, and K. Intriligator, ´ *Anomalies, renormalization group flows, and the a-theorem in six-dimensional (1, 0) theories*, *JHEP* 10 (2016) 080, [arXiv:1506.03807].
- [341] J. J. Heckman and T. Rudelius, *Evidence for C-theorems in 6D SCFTs*, *JHEP* 09 (2015) 218, [arXiv:1506.06753].
- <span id="page-29-2"></span>[342] C. Cordova, T. T. Dumitrescu, and K. Intriligator, ´ N *= (1, 0) anomaly multiplet relations in six dimensions*, *JHEP* 07 (2020) 065, [arXiv:1912.13475].
- <span id="page-29-3"></span>[343] Y.-H. Lin and S.-H. Shao, *Anomalies and Bounds on Charged Operators*, *Phys. Rev. D* 100 (2019), no. 2 025013, [arXiv:1904.04833].
- <span id="page-29-4"></span>[344] M. Yu, *Symmetries and anomalies of (1+1)d theories: 2-groups and symmetry fractionalization*, *JHEP* 08 (2021) 061, [arXiv:2010.01136].
- [345] C.-M. Chang and Y.-H. Lin, *Lorentzian dynamics and factorization beyond rationality*, *JHEP* 10 (2021) 125, [arXiv:2012.01429].
- [346] S. Pal and Z. Sun, *High Energy Modular Bootstrap, Global Symmetries and Defects*, *JHEP* 08 (2020) 064, [arXiv:2004.12557].
- [347] M. Nguyen, Y. Tanizaki, and M. Unsal, ¨ *Noninvertible 1-form symmetry and Casimir scaling in 2D Yang-Mills theory*, *Phys. Rev. D* 104 (2021), no. 6 065003, [arXiv:2104.01824].
- [348] E. Sharpe, *Topological operators, noninvertible symmetries and decomposition*, arXiv:2108.13423.
- [349] S. Hegde and D. P. Jatkar, *Defect Partition Function from TDLs in Commutant Pairs*, arXiv:2101.12189.
- [350] Y.-H. Lin and S.-H. Shao, Z*<sup>N</sup> symmetries, anomalies, and the modular bootstrap*, *Phys. Rev. D* 103 (2021), no. 12 125001, [arXiv:2101.08343].
- <span id="page-29-5"></span>[351] K. Inamura, *Topological field theories and symmetry protected topological phases with fusion category symmetries*, *JHEP* 05 (2021) 204, [arXiv:2103.15588].
- <span id="page-29-6"></span>[352] T.-C. Huang and Y.-H. Lin, *Topological Field Theory with Haagerup Symmetry*, arXiv:2102.05664.
- <span id="page-29-7"></span>[353] S. Gukov, D. Pei, C. Reid, and A. Shehper, *Symmetries of 2d TQFTs and Equivariant Verlinde Formulae for General Groups*, arXiv:2111.08032.